Everyone has moments in life that are not so good. At some point, we all get unmotivated. At that time, you will probably meet people who will try to get you back on track by giving you a lot of advice.
These people will mean well, but many times they will give you remarkably wrong tips.
The problem is that these people are simply repeating advice they\xe2\x80\x99ve heard at conferences from motivational speakers or authors. These tips that many people follow will unfortunately not allow you to regain your motivation.
In what follows, I will go over 3 very popular motivational tips that will probably lead you to disaster.
Many people keep saying that the key to success is to write down your goals in life. The more clearly and precisely your goals are defined, the greater your chances of achieving them.
To support their statements, these motivation experts usually rely on an experiment done with the Yale class of 1953.
The study asked graduating Yale seniors if they had specific goals they wanted to achieve in the future that they wrote down on paper. Twenty years later, the researchers found that the 3% of students who had specific goals written down on paper were richer than the 97% of other students.
This would seem to prove that writing down your goals is the key to success.
Unfortunately, it\xe2\x80\x99s not that simple. Of course, having specific long-term goals is important. However, this is no guarantee of success. In other words, being specific is important, but it is not enough.
Your motivation will not be increased tenfold. You will have to find something else.
When a person has trouble motivating themselves, they may feel afraid of doing something wrong. The fear of failure prevents this person from taking action. De facto, you will try to reassure this person by saying:
\xe2\x80\x9cJust do your best!\xe2\x80\x9d
Theoretically, this takes the pressure off the person receiving this advice. In reality, in a rather ironic way, it will produce the opposite effect to the one desired: it will more or less give that person permission to be mediocre.
Several researchers have successfully demonstrated that simply trying to do your best keeps you from reaching your full potential. By setting very high goals, you will have to work harder, while being even more focused. Putting more effort into a very high goal will really help you to perform at your best.
So never hesitate to pursue goals that may seem too high at first.
You\xe2\x80\x99ve probably already read Napoleon Hill\xe2\x80\x99s bestseller \xe2\x80\x9cThink and Grow Rich\xe2\x80\x9d. In this book, which I love, Napoleon Hill extols the virtues of positive mental reinforcement to become rich. You must visualize every day the goal you want to achieve.
This is the best way to achieve success according to him.
So some people think that to motivate yourself, you have to visualize your success. This approach has its merits, but again, it is not enough. By constantly visualizing your success, you will omit all the efforts and failures that will probably precede your future success.
As a result, you will have a harder time dealing with your failures. You must understand that overnight successes only exist for those who have built them for many years beforehand. It is like laying the foundations of your success through hard work.
A better mental approach is to visualize your success, but more importantly, all the obstacles and problems you will have to face to achieve it. You will be much better prepared for the harsh reality of the road to success.
Success in life is within the reach of all those who can make the necessary efforts for a sufficiently long period of time. Resilience and patience are two essential parameters that come together with unwavering motivation.
For those who have motivation problems, the temptation is strong to apply ready-made motivation tips like the ones I just revealed.
Applied without further work, these tips will probably lead you to disaster. Optimism is important, but it is nothing without real preparation for all the obstacles and challenges you will have to face. It is in your best interest to cultivate a more realistic approach to things to make the best use of your abilities to succeed.
(Disclaimer: This story contains affiliate links. If you choose to purchase after clicking a link the author may receive a commission at no additional cost to you. Thank you for your support!)
