With the trend of motivational psychoanalyses coming into play many do not consider this emotion as a possible factor towards performance. There are many types of characteristics that come into play when it comes to anger as everyone can portrait anger in different ways. But I think that it comes down to 2 categories that can help the breakdown of the different characteristics that form the personality of a person and therefore the act of this emotion.
People who are able to control their emotions when in a state of anger and people who don\xe2\x80\x99t. The way in which the emotion is controlled is most important. If anger is controlled it does not go away, it is like kinetic energy that is used no matter what. Just as kinetic energy, that anger that is controlled is held by the person until the bursting point when the jar just spills over the top. But rather than keeping anger until the bursting point how about consuming this anger in a different way.
To put this into perspective we need a few ordinary scenarios. Let\xe2\x80\x99s take for example unfairness. A job offer has been brought to your attention but even after a great interview someone else got the job and this will cause a state of anger as let\xe2\x80\x99s say, you are more qualified than the person. Rather than just consuming yourself and you\xe2\x80\x99re energy with anger how about consuming this anger towards energy and motivation?
A research conducted in November 2010 by the Association of Psychological Science, researchers find that associating an object with anger actually makes people want the object \xe2\x80\x94 a kind of motivation that\xe2\x80\x99s normally associated with positive emotions. Looking at your life and comparing it to a person that might be having a higher quality of life compared to you would make you angry into wanting the luxuries that others have and you do not. Therefore it emotionally motivates you to strive towards a better quality of life.
This Ideology does go quite a bit towards Locke and Latham Goal-Setting Theory (1990). The anger must be concentrated on a target or a specific goal. The more intense the emotion the more focused the person should be towards that specific goal. Anyone can and will argue that it is difficult to set smart goals whilst under heavy emotions however it does very well meet the first 3 of the 5 principles presented by the theory.
1. Clarity
2. Challenge
3. Commitment
4. Feedback
5. Task complexity
As we have discussed previously how anger is focusing your mind onto a specific goal, which is the clarity represented by this ideology. It will be very challenging under heavy emotions but, the heavier the emotions the more motivation. As well as a commitment which I think is a very good mix with anger.
A good example of this would be people that participate in different types of sports where they have to train extensive hours to become better. They are most of the time bursting with \xe2\x80\x9ccontrollable anger\xe2\x80\x9d created by their fitness trainers in order to help them focus on their training as well as motivate them overall.
The only limitation to this would be that anger also provokes a pessimistic state of mind. More people tend to give up on something then they get angry rather than motivating themselves more to keep on trying. This may be caused by approaching the problem with the wrong mindset.
Anger is portrayed around us more often than we think however, different personalities will exhibit anger with different emotions. You may not see the anger in a person as it could even hide under another emotion. People that tend to have the best control of their anger are able to do so because they hide or better yet said, convert their anger into depression. This is showing how anger can be converted into a different element (emotion or positive action).
A very interesting theory that goes adequate in perspective with this would be the recalibration theory of anger. This is a computational-evolutionary model that maintains the function of anger which is to recalibrate individuals who place insufficient weight on the welfare of the angry individual when making decisions or any irrational actions.
This theory refers more to uncontrollable anger and how individuals with such anger are convicted into this state of mind. If a person has a negative opinion of an individual\xe2\x80\x99s interest this will cause a trigger within the state of mind and it is then just a complex equation of how important is the specific subject touched upon the negative opinion over the weight set on the individual\xe2\x80\x99s anger in order to trigger a violent or aggressive action. This action is triggered so that in the future the opposing individual will see the angry person\xe2\x80\x99s interest more valuable.
The way that this theory is implemented with the ideology is withholding the weight created within the state of mind to, later on, be used towards motivation to represent not only a better state of mind towards the oppressing party but also indirectly avenge the negative opinion of an individual. Most of the perspectives would refer to arguments that end up in aggression but as I have talked in my previous article there is no gain for such however, individuals with uncontrollable anger may not see it.
The trigger which causes a mass effect of anger can be determined by something that has previously happened in an individual\xe2\x80\x99s life and has left a mental scar. As such action can happen then would individuals be able to experience a high level of long term motivation caused by something happening in their life?
Being hurt mentally may affect someone to rise above the situation or above the oppressing party in order not only to heal from such mental scar or soul pain but also, to show yourself that as an individual you can do so much more to the point where motivation comes from the inner-self. Always try to keep a stable state of mind and stay motivated.
