'one greatest talents has always been coming with excuse for putting off something didn’t want do.', 'skipped the gym? eh, i’ll just make for tomorrow.', 'hit the snooze button? well, needed the rest.', 'brushed off task to-do list? wasn’t that important.', 'procrastination always inner battle. but losing has greater consequences than missed workout blown deadline every now and then.', 'six years ago, tried pursue dream becoming entrepreneur: did some freelance writing, built websites, and took some content marketing and design projects. but, despite all the time put in, wasn’t seeing the results wanted. why? because couldn’t get myself the uncomfortable work the difficult, tedious, and unsatisfying tasks that come with actually building business. kept looking for relief from those tasks, often scrolling through the news going out (yet again) for coffee break.', 'that was, and degree still is, the story life. right now, i’m writing book. writing hard. keep fighting the urge put off the work. but i’m moving along and getting done. the only difference between life six years ago and life today that now have system.', 'forge.medium.com', 'here’s what mean. truly productive, you can’t rely hacks apps new technologies. trust me. i’ve tried. you need develop your own sustainable system, set routines and practices that serves the foundation your work. system looks like this:', 'as you may have noticed, not all these things are related the work directly. that’s okay. system gets the right headspace get the work done. makes more disciplined person, when sit down write, can power through all distracting thoughts and actually write.', 'you will always want procrastinate. but you have system, you can productive spite that. work creating one today not tomorrow.']
highly motivated.', don’t have amazing willpower self-control.', don’t get read, meditate, drink green smoothie, and run 10k.', 'that’s because don’t believe motivation.', 'instead, i’ve built systems and habits that remove internal drive from the equation. so, whether not feel “motivated,” can still productive.', realize that systems and habits are not glamorous topic, but honestly, they work.', 'they’ve fuelled every step entrepreneurial journey over the last years from the early days, when jotform was just simple idea, growing team over 110 employees who serve 3.7 million users.', 'habits and systems have made all possible.', 'if you create reliable systems and continue improve these systems (instead your willpower), you don’t even have think about motivation.', 'let’s break down little.', 'in the simplest terms, motivation your desire something. it’s sense willingness that exists spectrum from zero interest burning desire take action.', 'when your desire strong, motivation feels effortless.', 'but when you’re struggling, just about anything sounds better than starting the assignment, making tough phone call, hitting the gym. procrastination takes over until the agony becomes overwhelming.', 'as steven pressfield writes the war art,', '“at some point, the pain not doing becomes greater than the pain doing it.”', love this quote because suspect we’ve all felt this painful moment. that’s when it’s harder stay the couch than get up, put your sneakers, and outside.', 'in his 2011 book, drive: the surprising truth about what motivates us, author daniel pink splits motivation into two different types: extrinsic and intrinsic.', 'extrinsic motivation external. it’s money praise trying not look clumsy the tennis court.', 'intrinsic motivation comes from within. it’s the desire act, even when the only reward the activity itself (or completing task).', 'intrinsic motivation implies that you’re acting for authentic, honorable reasons. for example, you start business help people solve problem not because you’re dazzled visions fame and fortune.', 'no matter how much you love your business, there are probably moments when you don’t want take action.', 'maybe feels scary impossible, the task hand downright boring.', 'that’s when systems can the heavy lifting. here are few strategies that have helped build sustainable systems don’t have rely motivation.', 'focus and motivation might seem like two different topics, but they are closely intertwined.', 'take example. this year, have work priorities:', 'these themes inform everything do. project opportunity doesn’t fit into one these three buckets, say no. distractions slip away and can make real progress.', 'for example, spend the first two hours every workday writing out thoughts. might problem i’m trying solve new idea. don’t book meetings during this period and definitely don’t answer emails.', 'but, arrive work feeling less than inspired, give myself permission something else long fits within three focus areas. instead writing and problem-solving, can read articles books these topics, meet with product team, watch lecture.', 'all that thinking and exploring soon makes feel more engaged. once i’m engaged, come with better ideas. and good ideas inspire take action.', 'this process isn’t accidental. it’s simple feedback loop use get moving days when brain feels stuck neutral.', 'in 2016 article for the cut, author melissa dahl shares,', '“the only motivational advice anyone has ever needed: you don’t have feel like getting something done order actually get done.“', 'go back and read that again, you want. know did. let sink in.', 'it’s surprisingly brilliant. your feelings don’t have match your actions especially when you truly want move forward.', 'you could feel tired, but still put your goggles and for swim. you could feel like you’d rather staple yourself the chair than build another powerpoint deck and you still get the presentation done.', 'dahl also quotes oliver burkeman, author the antidote: happiness for people who can’t stand positive thinking, who writes:', '“who says you need wait until you ‘feel like’ doing something order start doing it?', 'the problem, from this perspective, isn’t that you don’t feel motivated; it’s that you imagine you need feel motivated.”', 'once again, this where routines can outsmart feelings. sure, you might feel like watching cat videos, but every morning, you sit down your computer and open blank document.', 'you write for two hours (or whatever your routine entails) and you don’t bother taking your emotional temperature.', 'progress ensues. then you repeat, repeat, repeat.', 'the other day, had great idea during morning workout. was one these eyebrow-raising lightbulb moments.', 'unfortunately, had nothing with three focus areas mentioned above. so, made note phone and asked our coo follow mental thread.', was tempted chase myself, but knew had stay focused.', realize that delegation isn’t always possible, especially when you’re just starting out money tight. jotform bootstrapped company.', 'we’ve never taken dime outside funding, know what it’s like watch every dollar.', 'but when it’s possible, delegation can pay off, big time. offload activity if:', 'we’ve talked lot about everyday motivation. but how you sustain your drive for the long run?', 'it’s important question. the answer will look little different for everyone, but ultimately, we’re all motivated joy and meaning.', 'guardian columnist (and the antidote author) oliver burkeman first led buddhist teacher susan piver. tired forcing herself “good” and master the daily to-do list, piver decided instead focus the pleasure her work:', '“once remembered that motivation rooted genuine curiosity and tasks are complete alignment with who and want be, office suddenly seemed like playground rather than labor camp.”', 'she asked herself what would fun and then focused what she loved about each activity.', 'in the end, her day looked the same did when she was “disciplined” but the experience was nearly effortless:', '“yes, discipline critical, just like all the teachers say.', 'and there definitely stuff that needs doing that just never going fun, like paying bills and cleaning the cat box.', 'but suggest that instead being disciplined about hating yourself get things done, try being disciplined about remaining close what brings you joy.”', 'talk about perspective shift. all through tough times, work jobs don’t love, and endure genuine unfairness.', 'but you’re struggling something you care deeply about, easy yourself.', 'tap into why you started your business, why you’re flexing your creative muscles the first place. it’s much happier way move through your days.', 'to recap: establish your systems and habits. stay focused what matters. delegate and tune out the noise. your motivation will grow.', 'and doesn’t? you don’t need anyway.']
motivational statement comes down three words: “you’re gonna die.” i’m not trying scare you i’m being practical. you get one life and one chance make yourself happy. instead sitting and complaining about not pursuing the things you want life, something about it.', 'too many people focus other people’s happiness when they should focusing their own. you know why like making other people happy and motivating them succeed? because i’m already happy. might sound selfish, but the first person you need make happy you. (then you can make other people happy.)', implore you honest with yourself and ask the things you are doing will put you position succeed. not just the business world, but life. when you’re happy life, you realize that how you make your money much more important than how much you make.', 'in early 20s, spent enormous amount time surrounding myself with people their 90s. whether met them while traveling working the wine industry, would ask each one them tell about their life. they all started with these two words: wish.” some wished that they had worked harder, some wished that they spent more time with loved ones, and some wished that they did what they wanted instead listening their parents. they wished, they wished, they wished.', 'if there’s one thing learned hanging out with these old-timers, it’s this: there’s better time act than now.', 'if you’re your early 20s, this your moment. this not the time try practical and maximize your money you can buy something flashy like fancy car right out school. this the time realize that you have five-year window (give take) for you attack the life that you want win. travel with buddies and experience the world, start band hone your talents, start networking while you’re still living apartment with eight other people. since most you have major life commitments, this the time take the chance the life you want.', 'even you’re your 40s, 50s, 60s, older, there’s still time make yourself happy. you want that badly, you can get it. instead retiring and taking golf, maybe it’s time triple down and really focus what you want. live world today where there much opportunity available us, especially with the internet. gives access more ways pursue the things that care about the most.', 'bottom line: are all going die someday. matter your age, you have the time make yourself happy. we’ve never had more opportunities open than now create the life want.', was compelled write this post because it’s reaction what i’ve been observing over the past couple years. there’s this tendency people have pass over opportunities when they think they can just “come back later.” people are living their lives like they have unlimited time. all know that’s not true.', 'if can just get one person change their behavior, have that one conversation, take that one chance, i’ll glad wrote this. because the end the day, we’ve only got one bat.', '“you’re gonna die” should motivate you every morning get out there and get what you want done. you get one life one chance. the biggest poison encounter humans regret, stop making excuses and start making yourself happy.']
break the chain.”', 'these four simple words helped jerry seinfeld become one the world’s most successful comedians.', 'seinfeld’s mantra pushed him write new jokes every single day.', 'using wall calendar, drew “x” through each day which wrote. once the started forming chain, his motivation grew.', '“you’ll like seeing that chain, especially when you get few weeks under your belt. your only job next not break the chain,” seinfeld told young comedian, who had asked for success tips.', 'seinfeld’s technique, which ultimately led him landing hit television show, perfect example how success doesn’t always begin with extraordinary motivation.', 'like snowball gathering speed, sometimes the motivation builds after you get started.', 'by nature, i’m not highly motivated person. i’m not early riser, don’t particularly love the gym and don’t read two new books each week.', 'but somehow still managed launch jotform, and slowly grow network over 4.2 million users over the last twelve years. and squeeze workout many mornings, too.', 'getting stuff done doesn’t always depend motivation. can accomplish great things, even when just don’t feel like it.', 'the more avoid something, the higher our anxiety, and put off further.', 'to stop the procrastination cycle, need first identify the reason why we’re avoiding task. usually, it’s about prevention promotion.', 'emotions play key role both promotion and prevention focus.', 'it’s the “feeling like” part that the trickiest, but melissa dahl shared 2016 article for the cut:', '“you don’t have feel like getting something done order actually get done.“', 'this such critical point. it’s simple, but often difficult apply.', 'similarly, you think something boring unpleasant, you need take your feelings out the equation and decide advance exactly when and where you’ll it.', 'say, every day 7:00 am, you’re the gym. emotions. there’s lying bed, staring the ceiling and weighing the pros and cons exercise. save yourself the decision fatigue and commit your previously-determined schedule.', '“where i’d had huge success, had narrowed concentration one thing, and where success varied, focus had, too success sequential, not simultaneous.”', gary keller and jay papasan, authors the one thing', 'like morning pages routine, motivation can the result action, not the cause it. once manage get started, even the smallest ways, momentum will keep going.', 'sustained momentum toward singular goal creates compound effect. which is, essence, the concept that consistent, incremental changes can result fundamental changes over time.', 'between the ages and 44, warren buffett grew his net worth 1,257 percent. but it’s the next years that are truly astounding.', 'from 56, grew his net worth 7,268 percent.', 'slowly but surely, started building chain investments and never stopped.', 'the power momentum can explained with the idea called the physics productivity, which newton’s first law applied habit formation:', 'objects motion tend stay motion. once task has begun, it’s easier continue moving forward.', 'if start with small action putting our running sneakers finishing the presentation introduction chances are we’ll find easier continue.', 'this where routines come handy eliminate the decision-making process and decide not only when you’ll something, but also the exact steps.', 'say you want publish new blog post but can’t muster the motivation get started. commit completing just one paragraph each day until it’s done.', 'and take one step further: create ritual with the activity. pour fresh cup coffee, practice couple minutes mindful breathing and then get started.', 'some the most successful people believe rituals. take world-famous author and motivational speaker tony robbins.', 'every morning, robbins “primes” his mind before starts his day. just minutes, performs three sets kapalbhati pranayama breaths, expresses gratitude and prays for help, guidance, and strength throughout the day. then, brain primed, starts his day.', 'whatever you choose, your ritual will reduce the chance that you’ll skip the activity. fact, sometimes the ritual helps look forward like slipping pair comfortable slippers the moment get home.', 'motivation isn’t the fire that starts your engine.', 'jeff haden, author the motivation myth, writes that it’s…', '“… the fire that starts burning after you manually, painfully, coax into existence, and feeds the satisfaction seeing yourself make progress.”', 'many times, motivation comes after start working toward goal. the trick lies getting ourselves take that first step.', 'if beat ourselves for not having the motivation start task, then we’re not making any headway.', 'but figuring out what’s stopping us, and then creating schedules and rituals, progress will come whether not feel like it. and turn, the fire grows.', 'so decide what you want accomplish, commit routine and remember seinfeld’s advice: don’t break the chain.']
'when most people think accountability partners, they cringe.', 'it feels like lot work. feels hard, but it’s not. it’s essential making extreme progress your life.', 'it’s also very easy. something you can less than minutes per day.', 'in this short article, i’m going explain what makes great accountability partnership.', 'i’m then going break down very simple way you can daily accountability with your partner way that motivating but not overwhelming.', 'stoked?', 'let’s start.', 'the mistake people make that stops them from starting accountability partnership thinking that they need find someone with similar interests goals them.', 'that totally bogus.', 'it’s actually better have someone who isn’t doing the same things you are. the purpose accountability isn’t shared interest, but shared accountability.', 'it seriously doesn’t matter what your accountability partner trying accomplish. doesn’t matter you’ve never met them person.', 'the only thing that matters finding someone who will hold you accountable.', 'find someone with the same level ambition and desired accountability you.', 'that’s it.', 'once you find someone who wants the same level accountability you, then you need simple and fast system.', 'daily accountability the best way form habit and rhythm with your partner.', 'if you try weekly, you’ll likely lose track forget.', 'you don’t want lose momentum.', 'aside from getting obsessed with finding the right partner, the second biggest mistake losing momentum before you even start.', 'daily accountability essential.', 'it’s how you get into rhythm and stay track. that’s the purpose accountability. it’s not about friendship. it’s not about kinship. it’s not about fun. accountability about getting results your life.', 'do you want results? are you just looking for friend?', 'accountability partners will become some your best friends, but only because you are pushing each other forward.', 'the purpose the relationship isn’t friends.', 'it’s actually almost better you choose someone who isn’t already your friend. the sole purpose the relationship should accountability.', 'that’s it.', 'in the book, atomic habits, james clear wisely shares principle calls “the art showing up.”', 'he tells the story man who wanted establish habit going the gym every day. spent the first six weeks limiting himself only five minutes the gym.', 'he’d the gym every day for five minutes, and then force himself leave!', 'why wouldn’t just stay was already there?', 'because wanted establish the habit just showing up.', 'as clear states, “you cannot optimize what you don’t have.”', 'people focus too much the end-game, rather than starting. most the friction success getting yourself going.', 'so, rather than being overly ambitious your accountability partnership needs extremely low friction and easy.', 'it shouldn’t take more than two minutes per day.', 'here’s how works.', 'every morning, shoot your accountability partner text (or email that’s preferred), stating your three goals for the day.', 'at the end the day, you report how you did. addition reporting your “big 3”, you should also list the three things you’ll the next day.', 'then the next morning, you re-list the same things you did the night before.', 'the reason you want report your results for the day and list the three things you’ll the next day that removes decision-making the next morning.', 'these two texts messages should take you less than two minutes type out per day.', 'here’s what mine looks like with accountability partner. you’ll see, partner’s contact even named phone “daily accountability”:', 'once you master the art showing with these daily texts, you may add weekly element.', 'every week, sunday nights, addition reporting our “daily 3,” also list our “big for the following week.', 'here’s what looks like:', 'in addition daily and weekly, you may share your monthly goals with each other. this optional.', 'again, don’t overboard before you get started.', 'it powerful share your monthly goals with each other, but don’t bring these into your daily accountability.', 'the purpose this type accountability consistency and lack friction.', 'however, sharing big picture goals with each other can powerful.', 'remember: the accountability partnership intended serve you, not you serve it.', 'here’s quick snapshot monthly goal set:', 'every day, accountability partner and send two texts each other.', 'at the beginning the day, simply list our three objectives for the day.', 'at the end the day, report how did (e.g., 2/3) and then list our three objectives for the next day. this eliminate decision fatigue and set ourselves for powerful morning routine.', 'once per week, share our three objectives for the week, and the end the week, report how did those objectives (e.g., 3/3).', 'every month, share our monthly objectives. also 30–60-minute phone call discuss how our month went.', 'that’s it.', 'in the past month, i’ve overcome bad habits and emotional blocks that held back for really long time.', 'the core purpose accountability and reporting your progress awareness. you can’t improve what you’re not actively aware of.', 'this the reason most people never become excellent things. they don’t track and report their progress, daily.', 'if you want become successful any area your life, you need measure and report how you’re doing daily.', 'this will force you focus it.', 'what you focus expands.', 'your greatest asset your conscious awareness.', 'when you become conscious something and then aggressively seek improvement that thing with tangible goals and reporting progress, your momentum will skyrocket.']
ience has discovered the remarkably simple source for endless self-motivation.', 'we can anything set our minds to. but sometimes can feel like our brains are working against when comes achieving our goals.', 'plans learn new skill, get shape, save money and start business, keep getting pushed back the hopes that future you will handle “someday.”', 'it’s crippling behavioral cycle. fact, psychology, procrastination classified form self-sabotage.', 'but there’s good news. while learning how become self-motivated may feel difficult nebulous, the potential solution remarkably simple, according psychology today and cognitive neuroscience.', 'in their findings, psychology professor harvard university, ron siegel, suggested that the key following through motivation boils down this: bring optimism and fun back into the picture.', 'this sounds little hokey, right? after all, completing term paper your taxes isn’t exactly fun.', 'while this habit seems anything but scientific, the neurological reasons behind aren’t.', '“our modern brains are still wired for the ancient evolutionary purpose surviving dangerous environment. over million years so, developed specialized neural structures that selectively tuned danger signals.”', 'so when the time comes for create and productive, instead focusing the pleasurable and rewarding aspects obtaining our goals, our brains dwell the anxiety and fear that comes along with doing something new putting ourselves out there, daring fail.', 'we into survival mode and push away potentially uncomfortable situations. fact, optimism and fun are relatively new concepts for our brain, evolutionarily speaking.', 'however, there are few extremely easy methods you can make creating and achieving your dreams feel effortless and fulfilling:', 'siegel suggests one simple way snap out self-motivation rut write out list and get the joys doing something outweigh the initial pangs getting started.', simple two-columned pros and cons list will just the trick. yep, while doing that excel spreadsheet work might not fun, you’ll realize that being able enjoy your weekend without hanging over your head well worth it.', 'while this method effective itself, the next step what really drives this technique home:', 'as you write out your list, really try visualize and conjure the precise feelings and sensations that meeting your goal will bring you.', 'if your goal follow healthier diet, for example, try viscerally picture how you will feel from the results. think about how you’ll have more energy, better skin, how you’ll protect yourself from heart disease.', 'mentally walking yourself through the process success and the joys and benefits brings can teach your brain motivated something other than fear.', 'visualization scientifically proven increase your odds successfully reaching your goals. another article, psychology today reports that “research has revealed that mental practices are almost effective true physical practice, and that doing both more effective than either alone.”', 'for this one you might thinking, “but i’m not kid. don’t need rewarded every time something.”', 'however, going back professor siegel’s point, one the most critical aspects sustainable self-motivation pleasure and joy, and reward system fantastic way help accomplish this.', 'not only rewarding yourself for reaching goals good self-care technique, also changes the chemistry our brains and can make more motivated.', 'in study that compared motivated people’s brains lazy people’s brains, dopamine levels certain area the brain played large role people’s ability self-motivated. turns out dopamine released anticipation reward, and rewarding yourself for accomplishments can help you stay track.', 'just because positive motivation works, don’t make the mistake self-sabotaging your wins with counter-productive prizes, like spending lavishly. lifehacker put it, “if the rewards you give yourself undermine the goal itself, only serves set you back.”', 'remember, investing yourself the greatest gift you can give yourself. the new deserve it” should something that continues reward you for years, rather than punishing you after the novelty wears off.', 'everything from taking exciting class setting money aside for future endeavors can fun yet productive ways stay self-motivated. you’re doing something great for yourself investing your future. that something feel fantastic about!', 'like most people the pathway success, you probably have major hopefully audacious long-term goals that you’re tackling. but you probably know, these huge aspirations won’t get accomplished overnight.', 'that’s why you should find the time make symbolic fist pump every day. tech.co co-founder frank gruber put it, “this journey hard one and the only way make sustainable and bearable you actually acknowledge your small successes along the way.”', 'by celebrating those tiny wins, you’ll find much-needed daily dose self-motivation.', 'as long you’re focusing the fun, rewarding, sensory experiences accomplishing your goals, you will get through the hard work eventually.', 'if you liked these tips, check out website for more, and follow medium.', 'if you have any tips self-motivation, i’d love hear them.']
'last week left cushy job amazon after years. despite getting rewarded repeatedly with promotions, compensation, recognition, and praise, wasn’t motivated enough another year.', spent entire time aws building tools for developers. liked that field much that would have been satisfied working for the rest life.', joined amazon entry level developer. within 3.5 years had been promoted twice senior engineer, and was practically guaranteed another promotion principal engineer this year had stayed. potential the company was high, was told.', 'my esteem within the company grew along the years and was regarded expert and leader field. people looked and respected me.', made $75k first year and that gradually grew $511k last year. could have made another $1m stayed another couple years.', 'my work–life balance was good too, despite amazon’s reputation. didn’t need prove myself anymore, and could get everything done hours week. team worked from home one day week, and rarely opened laptop night weekends.', 'also, the people worked with were exceptional. had three managers total, and all were generous people with lots empathy. i’m very grateful everyone worked with.', 'everything was going well and getting better. but despite all this, motivation work each morning was decreasing almost inverse trend career and income growth.', 'it would have been foolish expect motivation start increasing got yet another promotion, another compensation bump, another big project. but there was something else that was trending down with motivation. was freedom.', 'for the first couple years motivation was off the charts. was mostly working with another person internal tool, and there was very little scrutiny around it. was time where had lot independence choosing how work and what work least relative more recent years. was just and the other person improving this thing, talking users, releasing updates, testing it, and everything else. whatever felt was important, generally got do. did the best work could for its own sake and were mostly self-directed.', 'the last couple years, however, were quite different. was leading the most important project the history department, with many stakeholders and complex goals. what could was always bounded ability convince all the people involved that was the best way navigate our goals.', was always going working somebody else’s terms amazon. the terms were simple the beginning (keep fixing the thing), but kept getting more complicated the years passed (maximize all goals; satisfy all stakeholders). then there were other restrictions inherent working large organization about how the work, what work do, what goals set, and what business was worth pursuing. this situation was squeezing into doing things that i’d rather not do, and vice versa.', 'what kind work would had forever? not something that did until reached some milestone (an exit), but something that would consider satisfactory continued until i’m 80. what out there that could that would make excited waking every day for the next years that could also earn enough money cover expenses? that too unambitious? don’t think so. because there are two types drivers that get out bed the morning.', 'one comes from the outside the form carrot stick. for instance, i’m not automatically driven tax returns every april, but make sure because don’t want prison. might not want work something dislike, but anyway because may need pay the bills, want buy fancy car. these are the extrinsic motivators.', 'the other comes from within. this what drives things when there isn’t carrot stick. hobbies are one activity driven this. but what was looking for was something that could for living that was also driven this type motivation: the intrinsic kind.', 'back the question whether this too unambitious. see, realized that extrinsic motivation doesn’t last. whenever got promoted, felt good for week, and then was over. when first hit $100k income, would take peek for few days admiring the six digits, but then wore off. when hit $200k, $300k, $400k, and $500k, was the same thing. would delusional think that earning $1m, $10m would suddenly make different. and feel the same with every other extrinsic reward material possession. getting them feels good for while, but this wears off quickly.', 'the things that don’t wear off are those that i’ve been doing since was kid, when nothing was forcing them. things such writing code, selling creations, charting own path, calling like saw it. know strengths, and know what motivates me, why not this all the time? i’m lucky live time where can something independently area expertise without requiring large amounts capital outside investors. that’s what i’m doing.', 'i’m going all independence, and i’m going try make living with own bare hands starting from nothing. don’t expect only things that like, but will terms. target cover family’s expenses before run out savings while doing something that intrinsically motivates me. what more would ever want satisfied with work?']
middle the day and nothing has gone right.', 'you’ve had late start the morning. then where you’ve just started gain some momentum your work, you get derailed. there isn’t emergency that has just cropped out, it’s random video your friends have sent you. before you know it, you’re sucked into endless loop youtube videos.', 'we’ve all been there. matter how well you start out, you eventually hit wall. it’s the slump nobody can escape.', 'most the time, give up. call day and hope carry the fight tomorrow. but eventually these days pile and find that there aren’t enough tomorrows. what there was better way?', 'we don’t just have bad days. sometimes have bad months. eventually, view that wasted year.', 'it’s the reason why come with new year’s resolutions whenever 31st december rolls around. yet, when think about it, the resolutions themselves haven’t really changed.', 'most people want lose weight and save more money. doesn’t matter which day the year is. all we’ve really done some form mental accounting where we’ve decided that past failures are left old ledger.', 'as chip and dan heath noted the power moments, this what we’re really telling ourselves each time:', 'all past failures are from last year and can think, “those are not me. that’s old me. that’s not new me. new isn’t going make these mistakes.”', 'what we’re really doing relegating our old selves the past. disconnect ourselves from past mistakes and imperfections, which leaves confident about our new, superior selves. that confidence gives the motivation begin something new and challenging something would have never done otherwise.', 'this sounds like we’re just fooling ourselves, but does work. researchers have found that google searches for the word “diet” always soared the 1st january. visits the gym increased. almost every activity related self-improvement saw spike.', 'of course, the amount time spent these activities cratered time passed. the end january, about half would have failed our new year’s resolutions already. there are number reasons why this happens, but let’s take look why fresh starts have such power.', 'we’ve established that there increase activities which betters ourselves over the new year. but researchers have also found that this spike occurred the start every calendar cycle. searches for the word “diet” spiked the first day every month and the first day every week.', 'these days are known temporal landmarks. they stand out from other forgettable days and break our normal behavioural patterns. causes take step back and evaluate our surroundings. that instant, gain the motivation make and follow through our decisions. the correlation with new beginnings has caused researchers term this the “fresh start” effect.', 'if you’re and about turn 20, there shift into adulthood. you’re and about turn 30, you’re probably thinking about how your career has shaped out far. you’re and about turn 40, family now becomes greater priority.', 'these seemingly arbitrary milestones grab our attention because there sense new beginning. get the sense that we’re entering new phase life. and beginnings are especially powerful because get clean slate. it’s chance start all over.', 'back the original story. what you when it’s the middle the day and you’ve gotten nothing done?', 'it’s natural get stressed. midpoints often cause mental alarms off. it’s what daniel pink, author when: the scientific secrets perfect timing, calls the “uh oh” effect: it’s the moment when realise we’ve squandered half our time. yet it’s also beneficial because injects healthy dose stress that revives our motivation and reshapes our strategy.', 'the obvious thing look for fresh start. daniel pink suggests when that these days are particularly effective temporal landmarks:', 'but you require something immediate, it’s important realise that time matter perception. wednesday marks the middle work week. but also new day. the person who views wednesday fresh start would more motivated than the person who views midpoint.', 'the key make sure that you’re able disconnect past mistakes failures from the present. you’ve taken short twenty-minute break and came back feeling refreshed, part the reason that you’ve had some time rest. the other reason that you’ve created mini temporal landmark that allows you tap into the fresh start effect.', 'it’s normal for hit slump. what matters that find way continue even when feel like giving up.', 'strategies like designing your environment work better than keeping yourself motivated. but you need small boost, consider resetting and creating fresh start for yourself.', 'you don’t have wait for fresh starts. more waiting for the next year, the next month, the next week. you seize the day and give time your own special meaning, you’ll find new beginnings every time the day.']
are. awesome.', 'used right, they are effective tools for improving yourself and achieving your dreams.', 'for instance, recently experimented with unreasonably high goals and found that they totally drive accomplishment.', also feel that goals make any endeavor more exciting. they are like bacon: whatever you add them to, they’re going make better.', 'but your goal shouldn’t the thing that’s pulling you forward. is, then something seriously wrong.', goal something that goes away once you hit it.', 'goals condemn one through process where one has unsatisfied desire, works satisfy the desire and experiences pleasant but temporary feelings desire-satisfaction byproduct when one reaches the goal.', 'what follows, void:', '“this the inner paradox goals they are valuable when try accomplish them, but someday they will disappear.” charles chu', 'if you need goals feel like your existence has purpose, you’ll get addicted them.', 'some philosophers even think that humans cannot withdraw from the cycle dissatisfaction labor goal-achievement and choose stay happy.', don’t think that’s accurate, but pointing the emptiness goal-driven life, their argument relates important lesson the truth buddhism.', 'i’ve been meditating for over years now and the mindfulness-mantra that “all labels are fake” has always attracted me.', 'it sounds catchy and incredibly liberating, but when non-meditating friend recently asked explain what actually means wasn’t able break down.', 'to own pleasure, when was traveling from hometown the netherlands budapest (where i’m doing doctorate), something clicked. strange way, the meaning ‘labels are fake’ sheds light how can wrong with goals.', 'what does “label” mean? this context, ‘label’ means ‘evaluation’. something was ‘successful’ ‘unsuccessful’, you did ‘well’ you ‘screwed up’. you ‘made it’ you ‘failed’.', 'what does “fake” mean? (this where gets cool.)', 'in this context, ‘fake’ means not inherently existing. such evaluations are not factual properties states affairs.', 'they are not really there.', 'if “labels” don’t naturally exist, can ask, ‘what put them there?’', 'the answer ‘goals’. goals put them there.', 'without goal, you can’t fall short. without metric, you can’t inadequate.', 'these benchmarks, moreover, are projections our mind.', 'they don’t really exist.', 'that, think, the truth the buddhist lesson that labels are illusory.', 'the buddha even takes step further: because suffering comes from wanting, should eradicate desire.', 'the deduction that could put end some pain would stop creating the possibility failure, apt. the conclusion that we, therefore, should stop fighting, not.', 'some struggles are worth it.', 'which brings the deeper argument for why your motivation shouldn’t come from your goals.', 'the number one argument for why achieving goals shouldn’t your core incentive that', 'goals are not the right cause for motivation', 'by itself, there nothing good about achieving goals. ticking off objectives has intrinsic value. doesn’t matter how fast you move it’s pointless direction.', 'many people spend too much time optimizing their strategy, and not enough questioning whether they’re chasing worthwhile aims the first place.', 'if you need targets bring the energy and motivation, you’re probably doing something that’s not meaningful enough itself.', 'what’s pulling you forward should your recognition that what you’re trying attain worth it. motivation should side effect that.', 'the right reason for doing something provided facts about the thing that you’re trying achieve, which make something that worth achieving.', 'by the same token, making goal out something does not suddenly make valuable important. many people have unimportant goals.', 'in nutshell: there’s deep difference between achieving goals and achieving something importance.', 'don’t lose sight that.']
man who has made all the mistakes which can made very narrow field niels bohr', 'ought learn how say “no” the stuff which halts your prolific potential. may the amusements via any gadgets some people, sometimes may design which will not assist boost your career. focusing the specific type design vital.', 'as the new year blooms, decide which kind designer you want be. you crave ui/ux designer, focus only that. you envy animator, put all your energy that.', '“focusing about saying no.”', steve jobs', 'being slow not bad but what matters keep moving every day the new year reach your goal. may min design challenge min quick logo design, make your progress every single day until the end the year. this time next year, you’ll find new-you.', '“don’t fear moving slowly. fear standing still.”', '-chinese proverb', 'making mistakes indicates that you endeavor something new. the design not perfect, implies that you are innovating. make fascinating errors every day. but master confess those flaws and make corrections that. such emendations will lead you innovate perfect brand-new ideas.', '“an expert man who has made all the mistakes which can made very narrow field.”', niels bohr', 'everyone learn every day. but the key is, you have very specific what you have learn attain your goal. take excel sheet and gather all the design resources you aspire learn. one column, add all the resources links, the next column add the date and time you want learn. after that, understand the primary things create design from what you have learnt.', '“i think life properly lived just learn, learn, learn all the time.”', charlie munger', 'if somebody states your design bad, deliver the best design tomorrow. the same person comments still worse, make the excellent design. strive hard proffer the best until they stop tossing stones and applaud for you. life too short squander proving naysayers wrong. make cherished excelling your deeds.', 'when you fly high, people will throw stones you. don’t look down. just fly higher the stones won’t reach you.', '-chetan bhagat', 'johnyvino the product designer, building transformative experiences for mobile apps, saas, and enterprise software.you can connect with him dribbble, behance and linkedin.']
'when batman meets superman for the first time dawn justice, you instantly know who’s charge and who’s trouble.', 'after crashing the batmobile and interrupting bruce wayne his rogue mission, superman tells him ‘bury the bat’ and let go, putting mercy before justice. course batman doesn’t, swearing revenge.', 'lately, feel lot like superman this scene. with stern look face, swoop try and fix other people’s mess, but don’t get much credit for it. this cause for concern, but not about those other people, about me.', lot strive become superhuman, but this pursuit has shadow. looms ever closer and don’t watch out, it’ll swallow whole.', 'despite our best intentions, self-improvement can make worse.', 'over the past three years, i’ve gotten really good noticing things. not just about myself, but others too. fact, now can’t not notice things.', notice when out people the subway are their phone, when the dude front switching only between his sports betting account and tinder and when the guy four seats over wastes all his time instead working. notice people who are always late, always behind and always broke and can pinpoint exactly what needs fixing.', 'now, finally noticed that all this noticing driving nuts. i’d love say don’t mind” and mean it, but it’s never true. mind. mind everything.', 'mindfulness gift when it’s directed inward, but outward? not much. it’s good thing realize you’re biting your nails, but constantly observing other people’s behavior? that’s curse.', 'why?', 'mark twain remarked that “comparison the death joy.” but, and this worse, it’s also the birth misery.', 'comparing ourselves instinct fundamental survival itself. gronk can outrun the bear, pick the right berries and get the pretty neanderthal lady, maybe you should more like gronk. modern society built mainly and for individual freedom, however, this useless.', 'and yet, every notice new chance compare. eats well, should eat better. she wastes time, i’m more productive. even rationally estimate our own abilities, comparing still hurts us, oxford study suggests:', '“the findings potentially have implications for social interactions the workplace well clinical disorders such depression.”', 'interesting, right? confidence and clinical depression can have the same source: comparing yourself others. most the time, the results your comparisons don’t even matter.', 'you’ll land bad place anyway.', 'most people make poor choices. they don’t want worry about money, getting early, what they matters. they, however, would never consider these choices poor. that label pure judgement part.', 'the problem that with much mindfulness, millions mini comparisons, judgement itself becomes habit. this common side effect self-improvement. since it’s all about getting better, you’re left with only two opinions other people:', 'whichever one you settle on, you lose. this self-improvement’s dark secret.', 'when you constantly compare yourself and decide you’re worse, you spiral into depression. but what happens when you think you’re better?', 'imagine you’re superman. you don’t need compare, you have actual proof: you can’t die, you know everything and you’re physically stronger than anyone. you’re the ultimate success self-improvement.', 'unlike most us, superman didn’t choose his superiority, but paid the same price: loneliness.', 'sebastian marshall perfectly described essay years ago:', 'you know what think is? you won’t understood once you step off into the abyss. the more you it, the more people won’t understand.', 'the second guy mentioned, the effort guy? he’s got coworkers right now can commiserate with who understand him. the business idea mentioned him doesn’t exist right now and there’s demand for it. his income such that even with low price point could still make 2x-3x what he’s making now and fulfill market need.', 'but then what? then he’s the only guy doing this thing. commiseration. people won’t understand him much. and the more you that, the more people don’t understand. you keep taking all those edges that one else will, pretty soon your neighbors don’t understand you, can’t understand you.', 'it’s just you.', 'the higher you climb the mountain, the thinner the air gets. more success, fewer fellow climbers, until you’re left with only one truth:', 'you’re the best, but you’re alone.', 'medium full posts telling people how they can become the best. more creative, more productive, more aware. but once you achieve that, once you’re better, faster, stronger, how you blend back in?', 'even you become superhuman, you’ll still spend your life among mortals. how you deal with that? see posts about this issue.', 'we’re worried about acquiring power over our minds, our bodies, our time that forget learning how use responsibly serve the world live in.', 'and so, often, the time get it, we’re victims our own success.', 'it all happens slowly, course. one day you opt out binge drinking, the next you tell your friends get their shit together and two years later, you run your own dev shop while they extended yet another semester.', 'you notice, you compare and through the years, you silently collect millions judgements until you conclude you’re alone. you might succeed self-improvement, but fail being human.', 'this the dangerous path many are on. know am. must find way turn off comparison machine, because it’s been running too long already. that’s the big, wicked twist the story.', 'in that scene from the beginning, i’m not superman. i’m batman.', lot are. the frustration from the loneliness our path makes bitter, impatient, and angry. abandon our true mission, one comparison time, until can retreat only into our lonely cave judgment. not despite, but because come out top.', 'you may feel you’re ready pay the toll self-improvement, but you still might not like who you turn into. think we’re improving ourselves, when actually, we’re becoming the villain our own story.', 'if you run away from mediocrity, but right into malice, what good does do?', 'for clark kent, the option compare went out the window when was child. the moment pushed the first school bus out the river, any doubts were gone: goes rogue, all die. lucky for all, before putting his cape, superman turned his powers inward.', 'that’s what must and it’s much more important than how much power have. the problem neither other people’s indifference to, nor our obsession with self-improvement. it’s the comparison that stinks.', 'be better for the sake being better you, not better than everyone else.', 'there’s not much gain from pomodoro timers and dollar cost averaging for the people who enjoy their lives precisely for the lack those things. just happens that because care about self-improvement, care about you-improvement too. because then could nerd out together. but can’t and feel lonely.', 'it duty deal with that loneliness and make sure doesn’t drag down. there ‘other people’s mess’. just mess. nothing swoop for. the dirt front own doorstep, waiting for sweep.', 'you have dirty doorstep too. only all sweep will our streets clean.', 'when the world asked him to, superman turned himself in. when the world asked him to, superman appeared court. knowing full well the rules did not apply, abided them anyway, for the sake the greater good.', 'in sick twist fate, meeting the renegade bat led his doomsday. the ultimate human evolution, superman paid the ultimate price. it’s what makes hard get out the trap: you can saint and still lose.', 'that’s why the movie beloved hardcore fans, but commercially, far from the success should have been. don’t want see the hero everything right and then die. know life’s not fair, but hate reminded this reality.', 'and so, tries build new team heroes post-superman world, batman too late when realizes was never his turn judge:', 'alfred: “you’ve got team here!”', 'bruce wayne: “superman could bring this team together better than ever could. his strength…”', 'alfred: “doesn’t matter how strong you are what abilities youmight have…”', 'bruce wayne: “he was more human than am.”', silence —', 'bruce wayne: “he lived this world. fell love, got job. despite all that power. the world needs superman.”', 'finally, batman learns true hero not defined the superiority his power, but the times chooses wield it. this moment called harajuku moment. coined chad fowler, tim ferriss defined the 4-hour body:', '“it’s epiphany that turns nice-to-have into must-have. there point getting started until happens. matter how many bullet points and recipes provide, you will need harajuku moment fuel the change itself.”', 'we all need such moment our quest for self-improvement. you have acknowledge you’re not hero start acting like one. had mine when read this quote the daily stoic ryan holiday:', '“when philosophy wielded with arrogance and stubbornly, the cause for the ruin many. let philosophy scrape off your own faults, rather than way rail against the faults others.” seneca', 'superman dead. must become our own heroes, his sacrifice was vain. don’t know where you’ll find your harajuku moment, but you need one. until then, until learn use our powers, the best can ask:', 'what would superman do?', 'most the time, would probably just keep sweeping.']
field, there are few ideas that are the key understanding everything else. biology makes little sense without evolution. physics without symmetries and conservation laws baffling. all mathematics can built out sets.', 'self-improvement isn’t usually regarded intellectual field. it’s mostly assortment various gurus and pundits’ suggestions how you ought more successful, happier wise. thus might seem like self-improvement doesn’t really have core ideas all just opinions.', 'however, think there are some common themes the art living better. these ideas are pervasive, coming again and again. even the writing people who take stand against them, their prevalence still requires that they are acknowledged.', 'nearly all forms self-improvement first require that you change your behavior. unless the improvement you’re after purely mental, you’re going have actually something first.', 'habits, then, form central idea behavior change. being able make certain behaviors automatic (or least, more automatic) going help tremendously with any change you might want make. get fit you need have habit eating well and exercising. get rich you need habit saving and investing. have loving relationships you need good habits communication.', 'not only are habits central self-improvement, but they’re also one the best-studied aspects psychology. have countless studies showing how the impact association, rewards, punishments and contextual cues will have impacts behavior.', 'if you’re looking dive deeper into habits, recommend:', 'how can you reach destination you don’t first know what is? goal-setting not only involves deciding what you want but also planning how you should get there. it’s common theme, even many people disagree about which aspects are most important.', 'goal-setting has also been studied psychological research and generally found helpful. however, also seems clear that just having the idea what you want achieve usually isn’t enough (although may necessary start). thus, goal-setting its own needs paired with plans, systems habits going successful.', good heuristic for goal-setting that they should smart (specific, measureable, attainable, relevant and time-bound). implementation intentions formulated if… then… plans tend work better than just focusing outcome its own. planning fallacies also need watched for many goal-setting efforts can overly optimistic.', 'some view the disadvantages explicit goal-setting outweigh the benefits. these people either argue for being entirely process-oriented and ignoring outcomes simply negate the value achievement itself favor different values.', 'if you’re looking dive deeper into goal-setting, recommend:', 'systems are tools that structure your behavior and decision with formal rules. productivity system one type system this case aimed helping you get work done organizing the things that need doing and telling you when them. other systems exist for helping make decisions, managing knowledge organizing your approach specific domains life.', 'the opposite systems intuition-based informal approach. what systems often encourage creating explicit rules guidelines which will discourage some tendencies you’d like avoid. getting things done, for instance, famous productivity system based avoiding the tendency forget what you need do.', 'systems are often built off concepts scientific management and organizational theory, but applied one’s personal life. thus business concepts like standard operating procedures, quarterly reviews and key performance indicators get repurposed self-improvement concepts.', 'systems, like goal-setting, also have detractors. spontaneous, intuitive, creative emotional approaches improvement may suppressed overly rigid system. nonetheless, understanding systems, even you choose apply them selectively, core concept worth knowing.', 'if you’re looking dive deeper into systems, recommend:', 'much self-improvement has deal with managing, guiding listening our emotions. indeed, those who take happiness emotional state, central our existence, may argue that all self-improvement ultimately aimed making feel better.', 'beyond being end itself, emotional self-regulation has many important instrumental purposes. overcoming fears and anxieties represent huge swath self-improvement literature. motivation and willpower overlap here well, even they may better seen concepts distinct from emotions subjective feelings.', 'cognitive-behavioral therapy sees thoughts, feelings, and behavior all being part interrelated system. the way you think about things affects how you feel, which affects what you do. how you feel, turn, affects your thoughts and actions. actions too, with their consequences, can impact later feelings (exposure therapy clear example this direction).', 'others argue favor listening emotions more than trying manage them. this view, emotions are important signals tell you about the significance events, often surpassing your ability analyze situations rationally. the job, school relationship you feel bad about might not good, even you can’t say why.', 'if you’re looking dive deeper into emotional self-regulation, recommend:', 'learning tricky concept here because there are actually two different senses the word. the first synonym for studying. this something that matters students, certainly, but may not something that feels central your life you’re longer school.', 'on the other hand, learning also basic psychological process. every time change from experience, get better anything remember something, we’re learning.', 'in this second sense, learning core concept self-improvement. like habits, learning has been studied incredible detail, making rich source research-driven insights into self-improvement. some might argue that learning the core psychology itself.', 'i’ve spent more time writing about this core concept than anything else, part because feel has often been neglected self-improvement, perhaps because many people conflate with studying. learning the first sense, deliberate studying, also important tool simply because it’s the means which one can understand the other tools better, tend give priority even other authors don’t.', 'if you’re looking dive deeper into learning, recommend:', 'most the core concepts i’ve discussed far are instrumental, useful for reaching some purpose. however, core concept self-improvement reflection those purposes themselves.', 'this typically moves away from psychology and more towards philosophy and religion. what you ought value life and how you derive meaning from things are deep questions that we’ve debated for millennia. even self-improvement itself perspective, one for which some pundits argue explicitly against.', 'there are two levels that this issue can approached. the first find system meaning values that you want self-consciously emulate. this could stoicism, buddhism, christianity some kind secular humanism. you might want consciously inhibit some your vices and enhance your virtues. you might decide that happiness the meaning life that the purpose our lives transcends how feel the moment.', 'the second level this system investigate meaning itself. this more esoteric job philosophers, and perhaps too abstract for many people who simply want answer for how life be. but given the plurality systems which often contradict, understanding meaning and values themselves can often help structure your decision which strengthen.', 'the variety value systems expressed the former too broad give recommendations, but for those looking think more deeply about the issue meaning itself recommend:', 'thoughts refer the things you say yourself your head. much mental content isn’t verbal, but our ongoing self-narrative important part both our quality life and instrument achieving things.', 'what beliefs are precisely (and whether they actually exist) less precise. some would classify belief propositional statement your head, like little bit logic with true false attached. others would see beliefs statements probability (90% true 54% false). still, others might argue that beliefs don’t really exist our head all, but are only inferrable our behavior. this sense, act had beliefs, but don’t really have anything corresponding probabilities propositions inside our minds.', 'regardless the exact format thoughts and beliefs, they form core concept self-improvement for multiple reasons.', 'the first that beliefs and thoughts may become self-fulfilling prophecies. many argue that since your thoughts and beliefs have causal impact your behavior, and thus your results, you may get into cycles self-limiting beliefs that become true only because you believe them.', 'thoughts can also create emotional feelings well, and thus may want control our thoughts even don’t care much about changing our external outcomes. the constant worrier may have nagging voice her head that says her success never counts.', 'the importance thoughts and beliefs ranges depending whom you ask. for some, beliefs have mystical powers that transcend physically justifiable version reality. believe something is, certain sense, literally make true. others reject the supernatural but argue that beliefs still highly constrain our attention, making self-fulfilling prophecies frequent. the opposite extreme are those that argue for mostly passive role beliefs, recording the world but not changings outcomes much. those people, having true beliefs matters more than believing things make them true. regardless where you sit this spectrum, the content our thoughts and beliefs central self-improvement.', 'if you want deeper into this topic, recommend:', 'there certainly are other concepts self-improvement i’ve skipped over here. some ideas are important but didn’t seem universal excluded them (compound growth, progressive training, metrics). you have your own thoughts core ideas that come again and again self-improvement, please share the comments!']
riss has made wildly successful career out improving himself, quantifying his progress, and pushing the boundaries human productivity.', 'but recent interview with clay skipper from gq, ferriss acknowledges that he’s been responsible for much what calls “the noise the self-improvement self-optimization space.”', 'the “noise” self-improvement are the aspects that are distraction from what truly matters. and, for ferriss, that has meant shift from searching for “answers questions about how more (and more efficiently)” focusing what’s happening “inside and helping you get comfortable being with yourself.”', '“not everything that meaningful can measured easily.” -tim ferriss', 'for many us, discovering what matters most happens through difficult times and realize what’s working for and what’s not. for example, while having successfully “improved himself” the nth degree, and having experienced incredible success, ferriss found that still struggled with his mental health: “certainly found myself, after checking lot those boxes, still suffering.”', 'whatever self-improvement methodologies tim was using had ultimately been distraction noise from what would aid him his mental health struggle.', 'it doesn’t matter how much money you have how much you’ve accomplished you’re still just miserable and ashamed who you are distracting yourself from yourself. this case, the money and accomplishments only prolong the suffering.', 'much what call self-improvement really just band-aid for deeply rooted pain. and this pain seemingly universal experience feeling unworthy.', 'tara brach\u200a—\u200athe noted psychotherapist and meditation teacher\u200a—\u200adescribes this unworthiness her book radical acceptance:', '“as friend mine put it, ‘feeling that something wrong with the invisible and toxic gas always breathing.’ when experience our lives through this lens personal insufficiency, are imprisoned what call the trance unworthiness. trapped this trance, are unable perceive the truth who really are.”', 'our root problem\u200a—\u200aas tara brach describes\u200a—\u200ais ‘unworthiness’. feel that are just not enough\u200a—\u200athat are uniquely flawed. and this why self-improvement can easily become problem.', 'if uniquely flawed and i’m ashamed those flaws, then only normal that will attracted anything that promises help “improve” and “better”. but the vast majority self-improvement does not address the roots feelings unworthiness but rather distracts from them.', 'and the thing is, this sort self-improvement “works”. you can experience short-term feelings success and experience dopamine-fuelled highs that make you think everything’s great. but, time, your feelings unworthiness will return leaving you looking for another hit “self-improvement”.', 'any improvement that doesn’t address your underlying sense unworthiness just noise. live fully alive, you have grapple with the genuine stuff life your own unique experience unworthiness, shame, and discomfort being alone with yourself.', 'and the way “improve” this sense unworthiness accept stop hiding it, fighting it, and compensating for it. accepting ourselves are journey deeper than any productivity hack supplement stack. it’s difficult, scary, and tara brach writes radical:', '“clearly recognizing what happening inside us, and regarding what see with open, kind and loving heart, what call radical acceptance. are holding back from any part our experience, our heart shuts out any part who are and what feel, are fueling the fears and feelings separation that sustain the trance unworthiness. radical acceptance directly dismantles the very foundations this trance.”', 'this sense unworthiness cannot remedied with competition, productivity, any form external success. and any self-improvement philosophy practice which fundamentally about compensating for this inner pain will only ever fail improve your experience life, your happiness, and your peace.', 'however, this isn’t say that must throw out the baby self-improvement with the toxic bathwater often find in. brach writes,', 'this doesn’t mean that can’t compete healthy way, put whole hearted commitment into work acknowledge and take pleasure our own competence. but when our efforts are driven the fear that are flawed, deepen the trance unworthiness.', 'tim ferriss’s goal has always been quantify his journey his followers could learn from him and progress faster. and with this recent revelation, seems has made giant leap that direction.', 'by exploring the vast universe self-improvement and self-optimization and coming short, ferriss’s new understanding serves lesson all: don’t waste your time with the “noise”. instead, build foundation self-awareness and radical self-acceptance, and then you can consider enjoying the practical advantages improving your productivity and external success.', 'the self-improvement world needs change. our tireless pursuit improvement, we’re often just masking our inner pain unworthiness. each knows this, one degree another. move forward, must turn off the noise and face our true selves without judgement only then can hope experience any authentic change improvement.']
ars ago, right after picking first self-help book the habits highly effective people, got hooked self-improvement. every new insight gained, every new paradigm shift that occurred and every limiting belief that got demolished was exciting counting down new year’s eve.', 'it wasn’t really surprise that got hooked self-improvement. you see, the months prior picking the habits, completely self-destructed. was stuck 9–5 job that absolutely hated and was struggling with serious gambling addiction that one knew about.', 'after having gone through enough pain, decided one day that had enough. had enough being broke. enough feeling like failure. enough the pain and misery. literally googled ‘how become successful’, and quickly learned that successful people are readers. that’s when had first glimpse into the world self-improvement, and never left ever since.', 'the hope, ambition and dreams that offered were much-needed source light after hitting personal rock-bottom.', 'fast-forward about year and half later, and had read more than books and followed bunch online courses. felt pretty good. instead self-destructing, was setting self-improvement goals. even decided start first ‘business’ after reading tim ferriss’ 4-hour work week.', 'however…', 'aside from few changes, life didn’t change that much. was still broke. still lived parent’s house. and, despite setting many goals, struggled actually achieve them. even though started ‘business’, didn’t really know what was doing nor was working with consistency and focus.', 'yes, mindset had definitely changed, but external reality didn’t change that much.', 'in mind, felt like the hero own journey. felt really good about myself all because knew much about success habits, mindset and self-improvement.', 'because all the knowledge had gained, dreamed and fantasized about how successful could become which turn made feel good about myself. yet, was still stuck the same place. was still playing video games instead working goals. and was still living $800 month…', '“knowledge not power…it’s potential power. execution will trump knowledge any day.”', tony robbins', 'instead actually taking massive action upon the things had learned, got lost more and more consuming self-development content. was almost like reading more books and following more courses became the goal itself believed that the next book i’d read the next course i’d follow could hold the secret (or better said, short-cut) success that desperately desired.', 'if you don’t watch out, self-improvement can become like being stuck maze. you may feel like you’re moving forward, but reality, you’re moving circles.', 'however, the discrepancy between the lacking results and the 18-month effort put into self-development became too obvious ignore. and that’s when realized painful but powerful truth…', was self-improvement ‘junkie’ who got lost finding the next ‘fix’ knowledge order make feel accomplished and good about myself. these good feelings actually served pain-killers numb the pain that actually experienced from lack progress and lack results.', realized needed stop consuming much and start creating lot more. needed transform knowledge into massive action.', 'at the beginning your journey, it’s good consume lot self-development knowledge through books, courses and seminars. this way, you built the strong foundational layer knowledge, insights and beliefs.', 'however, when you’re already into self-development for quite while, it’s time limit the amount you consume and increase the amount action you take. yet, this where many people seem run into problems.', 'you see, consuming content easy and makes you feel good about yourself. you feel sense progress, accomplishment and productivity despite not even acting upon your newly gained knowledge.', 'on the other hand, taking action much more challenging and out your comfort zone doesn’t always make you feel good. yet, taking action the only thing that can propel you forward life. you don’t take action upon what you know, you’ll stay stuck the same place.', 'that’s exactly the trap self-improvement. after months even years reading, learning and improving, you know that you know lot and you may feel quite accomplished. however, you don’t really transform your knowledge into action, you won’t see the results life that you’re hoping for.', 'you see, where knowledge junkies are chasing more knowledge, action takers immediately put their newly gained knowledge work. they gain new idea from book and immediately execute upon which why they’re getting faster results than those who merely consume knowledge.', '“i have been impressed with the urgency doing. knowing not enough; must apply. being willing not enough; must do.”', leonardo vinci', 'the problem is, you’ve been consuming content for many months that this became strong habit. it’s familiar territory, while taking massive action may still unfamiliar and out your comfort zone. you’ve not been trained yet. and thus, the majority self-improvement ‘junkies’ rather continue consume and feel good than take the uncomfortable road action.', 'yet, the only way live truly productive, fulfilling and accomplished life executing your goals, ideas and newly gained knowledge. leonardo vinci said, ‘knowing not enough, must apply.’', 'as soon truly realized the power behind this message, started taking action levels had never done before. that’s when finally started see real results ranging from improved personal finances faster business growth. longer did need the hero own mind. instead, actually made dreams and goals reality.', 'because this experience, end all articles with ‘now it’ call action. hope this encourages you not only consume the knowledge but take action well.', 'so here go…', 'if you are into the self-improvement space for while now and you haven’t gotten the results that you thought you would have now whether it’s your career, business, health, finances any other important area your life invite you put the consuming hold and execute full speed instead.', 'as someone who has built business out creating self-development content, sharing this advice seems against own interest. however, it’s the truth and can’t stand withhold that from you.', 'remember, you want make your goals and dreams reality, you need execute more than you’re consuming. much more.', 'to your personal growth,', 'jari roomer', 'founder personal growth lab', 'download free guide ’27 productivity hacks for superhuman performance’ learn how get more results without working more hours, achieve your personal business goals 372% faster and gain more free time (without feeling guilty about it).', click here download the productivity hacks guide (free)']
struggle develop and maintain new habits because they make their efforts unsustainable.', 'when people attempt make change this way, they overlook the profound power consistency. when comes developing and maintaining new habit, frequency matters more than intensity. you something frequently, compounding effect will start take place.', 'to build the identity the person you want become, ask yourself what the behavior person who has the habit you want develop is?', 'james clear refers this identity-based habit formation. audience one, shared story james told the unmistakable creative podcast about one his readers who lost over 100 lbs. instead setting goal work out, set goal drive the gym, and would only allow himself stay for minutes. after certain point, realized that might well work out. you take the first step towards habit, the inertia often enough carry you the next one.', 'note: was fortunate get sneak peek james’ new book, atomic habits (available for pre-order amazon). interview with him, which will air next wee inspired the idea for this post.', 'sometime last year launched online course called finish what you start. the process developing that course, our copywriter kingshuk mukherjee came with the term minimum viable action. the same way, startup can launch minimum viable product; you can take minimum viable actions develop new habit.', 'when you take minimum viable action, the inertia often enough carry you the next step. you build momentum and the identity person who has your desired habit until you become the next best version yourself.', 'in recent episode the unmistakable creative, asked chris bailey how people can get better managing their attention. and said the following:', 'if you’re not deadline, you’re going work something until you feel resistance it. could write for hour today? the thought puts off. what about minutes? thirty-two? twenty fifty? yeah, can 15. then refocus for minutes. you find that resistance level tame distractions and then over time you ritualize this idea you block off periods your calendar get into this mode. over time you lower that default level stimulation the amount dopamine coursing through your brain because this novelty bias that’s embedded within and you become better able think more deeply about your work.', 'when something becomes effortless for you, raise the level intensity. the same way, you’d never from lifting 25lbs 100lbs one day, you want increase the level intensity the point where you can get there without too much resistance, but it’s still somewhat challenging. put more concisely, bend but don’t break.', 'after years and books, still miss the occasional writing day. sometimes it’s because i’m bed with someone good reason miss writing day). other times it’s because i’m hungover, and occasionally need break. one way handle this reduce the scope but stick the schedule. instead writing 1000 word, write 500. many people quit altogether after they miss one day. but you make your goal progress instead perfection, you won’t demoralized missing one day.', 'when you try change too many habits once, none them stick. you try become person who reads every day, writes every morning, goes the gym times week, and meditates daily all the span week, none those habits will stick.', 'but you start with one keystone habit, will create ripple effect into every other area your life.', 'the best time stack second habit after you’ve maintained the first one with consistency. you through this process stacking, eventually you’ll find yourself making the impossible possible.', 'every now and then have friend who will tell they want learn how surf. share story with them that mentioned previous book, unmistakable: why only better than best.', few weeks after first three attempts surf, went happy hour bar jolla. the guy sitting next had been long time surfer who gave simple piece advice that made the difference between quitting and becoming surfer. told times because that point i’d too invested quit.', 'while didn’t state explicitly, understood that every surf session would have compounding effect. took more than sessions before stood wave. eventually, worked way down from the costco wavestorm riding 6-foot shortboard and found myself surfing skill level that seemed impossible when started. had similar experience with snowboarding. after two seasons and close days the mountain, got point where was able get down black diamond.', 'the progress experience from the compounding effect any habit isn’t immediately visible. result, people give quickly. they don’t realize that every day the show they’re building momentum. they are moving closer and closer breakthrough inflection point.', 'i’ve said before that having system essential increasing your creative output. having system allows you focus progress instead perfection and put your energy and effort into what you control. system also will enable you experience visible progress, which turn increase your motivation. the picture below you’ll see three jars marbles. each jar represents system that’s tied specific goal.', 'it’s personal adaptation the paper clip method.', 'it’s worth considering why you want develop some habit. people read articles like this one and think that’s the reason develop habit. they treat guidance like gospel and make decisions that aren’t aligned with their essential priorities. there’s nothing that everybody should do, even though there are plenty people who will tell you there are. (most them they also sell products for how that thing they say everybody should do). the goal isn’t live life that’s just efficient, but rather life that’s meaningful.', 'from writing 1000 words day learning how surf, i’ve seen the compounding effect habits over and over life. said audience one, habits are the building blocks all creative work and for that matter just about every goal you’d ever want accomplish.', 'i’ve put together list interviews with productivity experts who can teach you how master your focus. just click here.']
'“your can’ more important than your ‘iq.’”', 'that’s one the lessons julian mantle learned from the himalayan sages sought out after selling his ferrari and quitting his seven-figure career lawyer post stress-induced heart attack.', 'mantle isn’t real but robin sharma is. sharma worked litigation lawyer until was 25. was wealthy, successful, and miserable. attempt free himself from society’s shackles power and status, wrote book about fictional character who came back from the himalayas teach the real robin what he’d learned about life.', 'that book became the monk who sold his ferrari million-copy bestseller. it’s written conversation between mantle and sharma and the former has plenty advice happiness and purpose for the latter.', 'here are lessons about what really matters life.', 'when mantle gets the himalayan mountains, yogi named raman tells him fable. the fable takes place garden full beautiful, fantastic-smelling flowers. it’s calm, restorative oasis place you can order restore your energy any time.', 'wouldn’t great your mind was also place like that? sadly, for most us, our mind looks more like dumping ground full clutter, needless information, and ungrounded worries.', 'that’s why the first value the sivana system this: control your mind. recognize that it’s your job decide what makes into your brain’s beautiful garden the first place. you’re its guardian, standing the gate, choosing who and what makes through.', 'the yogi taught mantle simple exercise improve his guarding ability: “the heart the rose.” gave him actual rose and told him simply stare its center quiet place. then, mantle should fill his mind with thoughts about how beautiful the rose is.', 'this simple form meditation. you’re trying direct your thoughts towards singular, focused end. first, your mind will send you countless distracting ideas, but the more you practice, the better you’ll get.', 'the only way control your mind control what goes and comes out. practice discipline which thoughts you allow yourself have, and turn your mind into the beautiful, invigorating garden should be.', 'at one point the yogi’s story, sumo wrestler appears. sumo wrestlers are the epitome self-improvement. they call “kaizen.” it’s ancient, japanese concept that means “never-ending improvement.”', 'the idea never stop learning, always get better even it’s small steps and that growth just perpetual part life. unsurprisingly, growth also another virtue the sivana system.', 'mantle learned ten-step morning routine from his teachers, routine that covers all the self-improvement you’ll ever need. it’s called “the ten rituals radiant living.” tried sort the steps way that allows you them chronologically after you wake up:', good morning leads good day. good days add good life.', 'later the yogi’s story, the sumo collapses. reawakens the smell some beautiful, yellow roses the garden. these roses represent another virtue: selflessly serving others. this ancient chinese proverb captures it:', trace fragrance always remains the hands that present you with roses.', 'when you help someone else, something good will come back you. you won’t know when and how, but karma always does its thing. that’s why his post-law career helping the world’s greatest leaders, sharma always says:', '“give out what you most want come back.”', 'you don’t have join the salvation army good. small acts kindness and compassion your daily life are just powerful. every morning, take few seconds think about what good you can today.', 'whether it’s calling your grandma praising coworker, it’ll bring you one step closer what mantle’s yogi would call enlightened life.', 'the monk who sold his ferrari self-help classic telling the story fictional lawyer julian mantle, who sold his mansion and ferrari study the seven virtues the sages sivana the himalayan mountains.', 'it’s wonderful metaphor that shows true self-improvement rests only three things:', '“everything created twice first the mind and then reality.”', robin sharma']
that there isn’t single developer who doesn’t know what github least hasn’t taken look one the many repositories available. the wide variety projects you’ll find github make the perfect place for any developer become better version themselves.', 'since github has over 100 million repositories you’re looking for needle haystack. that’s exactly why we’ll going over github repositories that can helpful when comes self-improvement this article. this way you’ll saved the hassle finding the right repositories and you can start improving yourself right after this article.', 'this repository exactly what’s the name: awesome! this could the to-go-to repository for every developer. the concept simple. the awesome repository contains bunch links all different areas that have with software development and programming.', 'from programming languages books and big data, the awesome repository has got you covered! you haven’t done already, you should definitely take look all the useful resources that get mentioned this repository which you can find here.', 'the free programming books needs further explanation. this very popular github repository with over 100,000 stars and over 950 contributors. this list books was originally clone stack overflow thread. was moved github make better maintainable.', 'this repository written more than different languages and you can find the free programming books repository here. reading your preferred way learning new things highly recommend this repository you.', 'according the author this repository the essential javascript links repository very exclusive collection only must-have javascript links. whether link considered essential completely depends the opinion the author this repository. nevertheless, this great list javascript resources you could use when trying improve your javascript knowledge.', 'from learning the bare javascript essentials books that handle all you need know about es6, this list has wide variety topics that covers.', 'you can check out the repository here.', 'the gitignore repository contains list .gitignore templates which you could use when starting new project, for example. now that you know about this repository there’s more need struggle with setting your own .gitignore file. you could use one the .gitignore files this repository instead.', 'this repository has .gitignore templates for lot different programming languages, frameworks and tools. you’re rails developer this repository has got you covered. you work laravel? worries, there’s .gitignore file for laraval too. rather want .gitignore file for visual studio? that’s possible well.', 'if you’d like take look all the .gitignore files that are available take look here. this repository has over 100k stars and gets used lot developers make their life little easier.', 'if you like learning new things working cool side project the project based learning repository definitely for you. with over 35k stars this repository great resource for those you who want learn how build application from scratch. the tutorials within this repository are divided into different primary programming languages.', 'so you want learn new programming language while actually building something fun, i’d highly recommend you take look the project based learning repository.', 'the project guidelines repository contains list guidelines that work really well with most javascript projects. you aren’t javascript developer, don’t worry. you can find plenty guidelines this repository that can useful for any other software project despite the programming language.', 'you can find the projet guidelines repository, which has over 20k stars, here.', 'the awesome php repository contains curated list amazingly awesome php libraries, resources and shiny things according its description. contains bunch libraries, frameworks, code analysis tools and much more. these are really useful resources for every php developer.', 'you can check the awesome php repository here. the way, you’re more python developer there’s awesome python repository well.', 'even though this repository isn’t actively maintained, still has great list podcasts you could listen to. there are podcasts available languages which makes almost impossible not find podcast you like. this repository definitely not the most popular repository this list with close 1.5k stars, but the number podcasts this list astonishing.', 'if you like listening podcast you should definitely take look the awesome geek podcasts repository.', 'this repository for all the web developers. according its own description the front-end checklist exhaustive list all elements you need have and test before launching your website html page production.', 'the checks this list are based years experience with some additions from other open-source checklists. each point the checklist has one the following three categories: recommended, highly recommended and can’t omitted.', 'the checks this list vary from security checks seo and performance checks. you can find the front-end checklist repository here.', 'the javascript testing best practices repository can really take your testing skills the next level. covers the aspects testing your code very thoroughly and comes with over best practices when comes testing your javascript code. the best part about that some the best practices come with code example clarify things even more.', 'if you’re javascript developer that could still learn thing two about testing your javascript code, i’d highly recommend you checkout the javascript testing best practices repository.', 'thanks for being part our community! subscribe our youtube channel join the skilled.dev coding interview course.', 'skilled.dev']
provement the transhumanist sort requires that adopt entirely functional understanding who and what are: all our abilities can improved upon and all our parts are replaceable. upgradable.', 'the quirks that make human are interpreted, instead, faults that impede our productivity and progress. embracing those flaws, humanists tend do, judged the transhumanists form nostalgia, and dangerously romantic misinterpretation our savage past purer state being. nature and biology are not mysteries embrace but limits transcend. this transhumanist mindset is, fact, taking hold. can see the way bring digital technologies closer and closer. the screen encroaching the eye, from tvs computer monitors phone screens smartwatches goggles tiny leds that project images onto the retina neural implants that communicate directly with the optic nerve.', 'with each leap human–machine intimacy, resolution increases, and our utility value improved along some measurable metric. this the mindset encouraged wristbands that count our heartbeats and footsteps under the pretense improved health life extension. health, happiness, and humanity itself are all reducible data points and subject optimization.', 'we are all just numbers: the quantified self.', 'like music recording that can reduced code and stored file, the quantified human can also reduced bits, replicated infinitely, uploaded the cloud, installed robot. but only the metrics choose follow are recorded and translated. those don’t value, don’t even know about, are discarded the new model.', 'improved longevity, supercognition, military prowess all sound promising until consider what being left behind, whose values are being expressed (and whose aren’t), and how these choices change the larger systems which are part. just life-saving antibiotics also strengthen bacteria and weaken the collective immune system, steroids improve short-term performance the expense long-term health, there are trade-offs. we—or the companies selling the improvements—are actively picking which features humanity enhance and which suppress ignore. amplifying individual’s brainpower, may inadvertently disable some their ability connect with others achieve organismic resonance. what racial diversity, gender fluidity, sexual orientation, body type? the human traits that are not favored the market will surely abandoned.', 'could that happen civilization supposedly enlightened our own? our track record suggests will.', 'the internet’s tremendous social and intellectual potential was surrendered short-term market priorities, turning human-centered medium into platform for manipulation, surveillance, and extraction. the more see the human being technology enhanced, the greater the danger applying this same market ethos people, and extending our utility value the expense others. life extension becomes the last-ditch attempt the market increase our available timeline consumers—and consumers willing spend anything for that extra few years longevity.', 'sure, many would accept digital implant really worked advertised. who wouldn’t want some painless enhancements, free side effects? the choice when whether die? besides, participation the ever-changing economy requires some acquiescence technology, from streetcars and eyeglasses elevators and computers.', 'but our technological investments come with strings. the deals are not honest; they’ve never been. companies change their user agreements. they sell the printers loss and then overcharge for the ink cartridges. the technologies are currently bringing into our lives turn into always-on customers—more like subscribers than purchasers, never really owning fully controlling what we’ve bought. operating system upgrades render our hardware obsolete, forcing buy new equipment. how long until that chip brain, and the neurons that grew around it, are obsolete?', 'it’s not that wanting improve ourselves, even with seemingly invasive technology, wrong. it’s that humans should making active choices about what want ourselves, rather than letting the machines, the markets propelling them, decide for us.']
fail almost everything and still win big', 'by scott adams', 'rating: 10/10', 'best line #1: goals are for losers.', 'best line #2: optimism like old cat that likes disappear for days, but always expect return.', 'here one the most important lines i’ve ever read nonfiction: goals are for losers. it’s beautiful four-word sentence that immediately switched thinking while also affirming everything experience had been telling me. goals are for losers. what could that possibly mean?', 'for one thing, goals lead strange sense letdown once they’re achieved. wednesday’s post talked about “post achievement depression.” the best description this effect found scott adams’ book:', 'if you achieve your goal, you celebrate and feel terrific, but only until you realize you just lost the thing that gave you purpose and direction.', 'goals are like matches. they can start fire. and that’s great but the fire burns out eventually and you have find another match. it’s akin the standard motivational cycle. you hype yourself something, get done, and then have hype yourself again. and what about those times that you don’t achieve your goals? i’ve had this happen quite often, practically every day, and always led anger and frustration before reading this book.', 'there must some other way.', 'adams argues for systems approach.', 'for our purposes, let’s say goal specific objective that you either achieve don’t sometime the future. system something you regular basis that increases your odds happiness the long run. you something every day, it’s system. you’re waiting achieve someday the future, it’s goal.', 'when first read this, had already become creature strange habit. had system sorts. and had already stumbled the idea emergence understood that habits were what drove lot ability. but the habits were little clunky and was still enamored with the chase must achieve this thing) rather than the daily practice and the idea multiple pursuits.', 'so adams’ idea seemed like great connection between the findings cal newport’s book “deep work” and ericsson’s “peak”. this was especially true with the view towards energy.', 'energy', 'adams argues that energy the most vital resource for anyone’s success. think we’ve all experienced this. when your energy high, every possibility opens up. the trick understand that this energy isn’t the result your emotions; it’s the other way around. and energy, like all such resources, can cultivated.', 'here’s where get the boring, obvious stuff; the stuff you already know and maybe want ignore. adams writes below:', 'the most important form selfishness involves spending time your fitness, eating right, pursuing your career, and still spending quality time with your family and friends.', 'when read this the first time, felt little guilt and some mild irritation. paid fifteen bucks read this? but the next line hit pretty hard.', 'i’m giving you permission take care yourself first, you can better job being generous the long run.', 'the argument here that the lack self-care will only create lack energy and thus real problem for your mental and physical state. seems obvious but it’s the phrase the beginning that gets me: “i’m giving you permission ….” that’s powerful because career-minded ambitious types never this for ourselves; think actually wait for someone tell this and adams knows it. furthermore, knows that self-care helps care for others the long run. hence the word “generous” his quote.', 'some people would say this where one needs hobby. trouble is, don’t really have hobbies. don’t think understand hobbies. hence the lack self-care.', 'what adams basically argues that hobby not, there are things you can that will create and sustain the right amount energy which then leads better states mind and body. you aren’t weekend fisherman? don’t belong quilting circle? big deal. the real advice stands regardless: exercise, eat right, pursue career, spend time with friends and family.', 'these things need done every day. these are the foundations the system. doing them every day, you eliminate the strain choice. these things steadily become force habit. and jerry seinfeld would say, doing them every day helps you make sure you don’t break the chain.', 'the idea doing these things every day fixed real problem. prior this point, had suffered serious inconsistency issues with fitness. would tell myself, “work out three days week. start with that modest goal. then four days.”', 'sounds good but that day in-between killer. you take one day off and then, somehow, you take two days off. then three.', 'now you’re straying from the goal and feeling frustrated. frustration saps energy. not working out drains energy. next thing you know, you’re tired you don’t work out all.', lot research has demonstrated that exercise actually creates energy. what’s the takeaway?', 'do every day. you planned working out three times week, thirty minutes each time, far better stretch those minutes over seven days week. better work out minutes every day than minutes days week. this the systems approach.', 'consider this, too: there goal here. most times, people work out because they want lose weight run 5k. and again, forgive the repetition, but what happens once the complete? the weight lost? sense what known the regression the mean. whatever happens your average day, your “mean” set routines, what you return to. the was just short-lived intervention; brief affair.', 'by the way, this doesn’t really have anything with fitness. exercise simply metaphor. apply this the workplace and the logic stands. for example, often want responsive with customer service. but don’t just spurts super-responsiveness (e.g., i’ll answer every call the first ring this week). instead, make standard, such responding all voicemails within hours, and hold every day.', 'so the system adams’ way saying must elevate our average day with mindful, regular practice. must make better than the stuff the beatles lyric:', 'woke up, fell out bed', 'dragged comb across head', 'found way downstairs and drank cup', 'and looking noticed was late', 'found coat and grabbed hat', 'made the bus seconds flat', 'made way upstairs and had smoke', 'and everybody spoke and went into dream', 'compare this with adams’ description his mornings when working full-time job:', 'most people aren’t lucky enough have flexible schedule. didn’t have one either for the first sixteen years corporate life. did the next best thing going bed early and getting 4:00 a.m. creative side projects. one those projects became the sketches for dilbert.', fellow member the 4:00 a.m. club. wonder love this book.', 'simplicity optimization', 'so systems. right. got it. but ran into trouble with this idea right away. work and home. both places, started implementing routines and structures the best fashion lean practice, developing kpis and feedback loops like some finely-tuned machine. had whole framework going and had never been more miserable! was terrible!', 'terrible because adams touches something knew but wanted ignore: complexity makes things more difficult. gets great dichotomy that sets later the book, the difference between simplifiers and optimizers.', 'some people are what call simplifiers and some are optimizers. simplifier will prefer the easy way accomplish task, while knowing that some amount extra effort might have produced better outcome. optimizer looks for the very best solution even the extra complexity increases the odds unexpected problems.', 'to great shame and humiliation, consummate optimizer despite the fact want simplifier. but when you mix this knowledge with what we’ve seen from gary klein’s book, sources power, starts make sense. are optimizers every realm where lack expertise. build elaborate plans and systems these places. eager beginner weight-lifting comes with exercise log, pre-made sequence lifts, quarterly benchmarks, and post-workout protein shake. long-time lifter just shows the gym.', 'so split hair adams’ framework, the reality that all have bit simplifier and bit optimizer within us. since was new building daily system, first few iterations (from two years ago) were much too elaborate. here’s example below:', 'exhausting, right? over time, redefined number these, combined few, and eliminated and altogether. they weren’t needed once tastes changed. (there’s great amount content this book about how mentally realign your food cravings and the techniques certainly worked for me.)', 'today, the system much more simple, lightweight, and strategic. true the pareto principle, daily practice underscores 80/20 balance what matters most. roughly 20% day committed fulfilling the daily habits that, turn, dictate the quality the remaining 80% the day.', really dislike making this about but it’s the best way explain the concept.', 'that said, i’ve been doing this the workplace for while now. i’m still tinkering with the approach but it’s true the tenets find the book review for essentialism. future posts and book reviews will show how this carried out. for those who are familiar, lot translates practices found agile and scrum techniques.', 'compounding interests', 'monday’s post was about the ratchet, the self-propelling virtuous/vicious cycles that take momentum their own. the systems approach all about creating ratchets with skill development. adams explains below:', great strategy for success life become good something, anything, and let that feeling propel you new and better victories. success can habit-forming.', 'not only can habit-forming, can also opportunity-forming. another great line from the book: where there tolerance for risk, there often talent.', 'talent leads initial skill development. this creates the initial ratchet and, over time, creates higher comfort level with risk. better yet, think leads deeper understanding risk.', 'but that’s not say that you aren’t talented unless you step out and something stupid. the risk, think, more the dance with failure that occupies the tuesday and thursday posts about right-sizing our “shot attempts” and achieving “net positive failure”. failure, you remember, can managed. risk can managed, too.', 'but what really helps solidify the connection between talent and risk see “talent” the basis for skill development. new skills create better risk profiles. adams writes this way: “every skill you acquire doubles your odds success.”', 'this absolutely true. put finer point it, adams offers this: good good excellent.', 'in case, have some skill graphic design. have skill writing. have skill data analysis. have skill presentation. none these skills are “excellent” but, combination, they create something unique and anything unique inherently more valuable.', 'but this isn’t about me. you have combination good skills, too. the more you mix those skills together (and acquire new skills top them), the more you can something that others can’t. it’s not that you and are “jacks all trades, masters none”. that’s dumb construct. the truth that can “jacks all trades” and thus master delivering something useful from that mix. mastery isn’t solely defined the pre-constructed subjects you encounter school. can defined far more eloquent, reliable ways. but we’ll save that for another book review when get robert greene.', 'conclusion: seek emergent success', 'i’ll close with two final quotes from the book and encourage you please grab copy. there far more learn than what can share here. the first quote offshoot the old line from seneca about how “luck what happens when preparation meets opportunity.”', 'from adams, reads like this: success isn’t magic; it’s generally the product picking good system and following until luck finds you.', 'second line that goes the concept introduced thursday’s post about directional correctness:', 'happiness has more with where you’re heading than where you are.', 'whatever the context, work personal, home office, you define and rely proper system that maintains high level energy, that energy will help you generate more skill, more knowledge, more ability. these skills, knowledge, and abilities will help you see risk differently. this will give you more opportunities. altogether, those new opportunities will pursuits built top foundation (i.e., system) that always ensures you are moving the right direction.', 'heading the right direction creates feeling rightness and progress and this, turn, ensures net positive traction. it’s the ratchet.', 'and while might seem like act faith, the reality that tending such things will undoubtedly lead some sort success. ignore the goal-oriented stuff. avoid the post achievement depression. single track for single goal not resilient. building system, infrastructure, that can support multiple goals, multiple initiatives, the same time, far better.', 'designing your system isn’t easy. i’ve been doing for two years now. there have been multiple drafts, believe me. but once starts moving, you can’t stop it. and they can’t stop you.', 'so much more learn. buy the book amazon.', 'mental models and principles']
'you hate for that headline. get it. here’s what can do: forget the money and don’t worry about the views.', 'the only reason i’m still writing has nothing with money views. has with what your writing can for those who read it. you can literally anything writer.', 'what one tells you that you’ve got show for long enough see what writing has the power do.', 'let’s cut the chase, writing can bring meaning your life, inspire others consider different perspective and change your life many tiny, insignificant ways that you’ll perhaps never even realize.', 'to able achieve all these incredible outcomes your life that stem from writing, you’ll need writing schedule, workspace that supports your writing, few tools, and some repetitive habits. here’s example each that you can use inspiration (or you can directly copy you choose).', 'even picasso had schedule. now i’m picasso before you assume that i’m comparing myself him. far from it, except the nose maybe.', 'my current writing schedule that follow like religion set out below.', write two full days week from about until just like job (thinking writing job can helpful).', 'each story written one after another with 30-minute break between every two stories. these breaks are used hydrate, the bathroom, and talk with girlfriend.', 'by batching all your writing into two days, you get the benefit not having deal with task-switching.', 'task-switching where you change the types activities you do, frequently. the problem with switching activities that each one has different energy and frame mind. the frame mind you need write from nothing very different from the frame mind you need record video edit story.', 'by keeping the same activities batched together, you maximize your energy and your ability execute. this makes getting started the writing easier and keeping for sustained period time far more likely occur.', 'the ability sit back and judge your work difficult. editing requires you your own critic and admit when you’re wrong need add more story. think editing cleaning story but often it’s about removing parts blog post that aren’t required.', 'saying less when you write actually says more.', edit four out eight stories monday night 7:00 p.m. and the other four tuesday 7:00 p.m. takes about two hours each day complete the task, although it’s not exact science. some weeks, when flow, can edit all eight stories one night.', 'fellow writer dan moore recently inspired take editing the next level. what i’m experimenting with editing story monday tuesday and then letting sit for day before giving one more read.', 'it’s easy miss really obvious mistakes your writing and multiple proof-reads can help with the problem you don’t have someone read your work like me, you find adding editor into the process stops you from publishing your work adds unwanted second opinion that clouds the initial idea for story.', '(the sub-heading really should read “research when you’re not writing/editing.”) research relatively new piece writing schedule.', 'it’s nothing overthink and many writers are scared it. all research from perspective this:', 'the research phase can one the most enjoyable parts you see that way and execute appropriately. i’ve found that every situation, movie, podcast, book, lesson, holiday, and person meet research.', 'living life research for your writing.', 'on sundays, typically wake 6:00 a.m. and prepare for the relaxing task being inspired photography and illustration. takes hour procrastination before get started around 7:00 a.m. looking for photos.', good picture more about your initial reaction and how makes you feel above all. you know when you’ve found the right photo match your story because you keep going back that one image.', 'the colors image are something pay close attention to. different colors cause different emotions and try account for that when choosing image.', 'at around 4:00 p.m. thursday, start writing few short social media posts shared linkedin.', 'social media posts seem flow both directions. some social media posts inspire blog posts, and other times blog post inspires social media post. either way, the art social media posts highly beneficial for the writing process.', 'every friday send email 40,000+ subscribers let them know what the most shared blog post the week and how might help them their daily lives.', 'not everybody glued their devices waiting for you hit publish.', gentle email once week helps people know you’re alive and haven’t died from snickers bar induced sugar stroke. you feel like car salesman trying sell 1978 honda civic without exhaust pipe, but don’t let that feeling stop you.', 'it’s okay promote your writing; just genuine about and leave your inflated ego the local nightclub under the disco ball.', 'the final part writing schedule reading other writers learn from them and inspired their stories.', practice reading other writers seven days week, all times the day, and remember clap loudly their stories often possible (ideally until the daily clap limit reached you can then turn twitter and retweet them you’re really keen). these are the writers i’m clapping lot lately:', 'having workspace that compliments your work important too. the area you work affects your mental headspace and that impacts your writing. here are few things recommend.', always wear cotton pants workspace (ok, tim, you weirdo!). there’s something about the silky smooth texture cotton tooshie that makes comfortable. writing comfort helps you write longer.', 'sprinkle little bit nature your workspace with pot plant two.', 'you don’t have work wework office inspired indoor plants. they’re hip and cool for reason, they bring peace your environment and clean the air.', 'remove briefcases, work shoes, suits, work phones, work laptops, any other item that reminds you your day job.', 'thinking about the stress your day job destructive healthy writing schedule. out sight out mind, they say.', 'while we’re it, put your hands up, hand over your personal phone and have another room doesn’t kill your writing dreams. you have watch and has apps, that needs too.', 'you can’t write words change the world with notifications interrupting your precious thought patterns. drop your phone and give twenty.', 'make your desk clean that mary poppins herself would impressed what you learned childhood.', 'shine that beautiful machine desk with wet wipes and respect its right clean and free from coffee stains and papers that should scanned and placed the recycle bin.', writing schedule also needs tools help “make the magic happen,” they say. these are all the tools use and there are affiliate links secret commissions just case you’re wondering.', 'here bookmarks toolbar inspiration for how layout your own for easy access. try remove social media links (linkedin slipped into toolbar…oops).', good writing schedule built the foundation habits. the habits focus produce current writing results are below.', try and exercise writing muscle every single day. often it’s just writing notes myself capturing ideas. always writing, they say (or say).', 'best-selling author seth godin writes daily his blog and has been for years. attributes this practice being helpful for him making sense the world through writing.', 'respect the people who support your work. readers pay you with their time and you must respect them they’ll stop paying you and perhaps turn social media express their outrage and persuade others the same.', 'it takes nothing send short reply acknowledge reader’s existence. kind, and surprise and delight readers where you can.', 'when think gratitude, often think dudes with long hair sitting the beach and pretending they studied monk before high-fiving jay shetty the airport london.', 'gratitude, writer, simply being humble for where you are right now and appreciating how far you’ve come and far you have go. writer’s journey never complete and pays incredibly humble.', 'writers are plagued thoughts like “am enough?” and “what the freaking hell have say that’s damn remarkable?”', 'all suffer from these same destructive thoughts now and then. writing that impacts readers hard work and requires courage, which can feel like walking down the street with adam and eve’s gifts exposed for the world see and point at.', 'time spent silence the antidote noisy mind.', 'let’s finish high with look what ideal writing day looks like for me. it’s obviously not like this every single time but it’s pretty close and will help you think about your own writing schedule and process.', 'so there you have it. that the schedule, workspace design, tools, and habits that helped produce 30m views and earn six figures writer.', 'it’s simple process that might help your own writing flourish, finally get started writing you haven’t already. anyone can writer, including you, with the right process support your goal.']
van schneider first appeared personal email list.', 'we’re always waiting for inspiration find us. we’re waiting get inspired paint this perfect piece art, build the next big thing come with this great advertising idea. we’re just sitting there waiting.', still sometimes, like idiot don’t know better after all these years chasing inspiration.', 'the problem with finding the perfect inspiration that it’s just romantic dream. waiting for inspiration show and solve problems really nothing more than empty promise.', 'inspiration little bit like love. seeking for the perfect love like seeking for perfect inspiration. the harder you try, the longer will take. it’s like magic, maybe even luck.', 'now you might think that luck not fair and rather unpredictable because some have more and some have less. for luck more like attitude.', 'you might not able control your own luck inspiration, but you can definitely enhance it’s chances putting yourself positions where luck inspiration more likely happen.', 'when talking about inspiration, first need stop seeking inspiration. this might sound counterproductive first and appears involve risk because often work under pressure, and don’t have the time stop thinking about something actually need think about.', 'inspiration usually strikes when you are not forcing strike.', 'let’s just imagine inspiration exists random pattern our life, the example illustrated below. when forcing find inspiration (see path very linear/narrow and the chances are pretty low get hit inspiration will probably take forever.', 'if don’t try force inspiration happen, path appears more organic random (see 2). might for walk, the movies, read book just start working. doesn’t matter what do, but what happens that put myself situations where i’m more likely get hit those little spots inspiration.', 'the key start doing something, right now! it’s about start working immediately even you don’t feel inspired know where you are going yet. inspiration will only hit you once you are already motion, not while standing still doing nothing.', 'and pablo picasso already said:', '“inspiration exists,but has find working.”', 'this interesting concept because completely goes against our logic that first have inspired order work. but reality that’s lie it’s exactly the other way around.', 'so the next time you say just don’t feel inspired right now” you know how fix it. start working right now and create your own inspiration.', 'happy sundaytobias', '___if you enjoyed reading this article, would appreciateit you hit the “recommend” button.', '___i’m tobias, product design lead spotify nyc. founder authentic weather semplice, advisor memomi www.vanschneider.com']
'jump section', 'on fighting the urge follow the herd:', 'on finding the beauty chaos:', 'on persevering through adversity:', 'on following your instinct:', 'on taking charge your life:', 'i’ve never really gotten much out the inspirational quotes you can find all over pinterest instagram. me, these quotes are like candy they might give you quick boost, but they’re mostly empty calories. reminders live, laugh, and love won’t much actually change your life.', 'still, have practice collecting words from those admire and turning them challenging times. these days, i’ve been doing that more often than usual. all these quotes give perspective and remind what’s important. hope some them resonate with you, too.', 'that last line one favorite inspirational quotes all time. this isn’t ideal time for any us, but it’s the time we’re in. matter where you are life what happens, make the best it.']
'marcus vitruvius pollio, born around bc, served the roman army under caesar and specialized the design and construction artillery machines. his duties took him what are now spain and france and far away north africa. vitruvius later became architect and worked temple, longer existence, the town fano italy. his most important work was literary, the only surviving book architecture from classical antiquity: architectura, known today the ten books architecture.', 'for many dark centuries, vitruvius’s work had been forgotten, but the early 1400s was one the many pieces classical writing, including lucretius’s epic poem the nature things and cicero’s orations, that were rediscovered and collected the pioneering italian humanist poggio bracciolini. monastery switzerland, poggio found eighth-century copy vitruvius’s opus, and sent back florence. there became part the firmament rediscovered classical works that birthed the renaissance. brunelleschi used reference when traveled rome young man measure and study the ruins classical buildings, and alberti quoted extensively his treatise architecture. latin edition was published the late 1480s one italy’s new print shops, and leonardo wrote notebook, “enquire the stationers about vitruvius.”', 'what made vitruvius’s work appealing leonardo was that gave concrete expression analogy that went back plato and the ancients, one that had become defining metaphor renaissance humanism: the relationship between the microcosm man and the macrocosm the earth.', 'leonardo embraced the analogy both his art and his science. famously wrote around this time, “the ancients called man lesser world, and certainly the use this name well bestowed, because his body analog for the world.”', 'applying this analogy the design temples, vitruvius decreed that the layout should reflect the proportions human body, the body were laid out flat its back upon the geometric forms the floor plan. “the design temple depends symmetry,” wrote the outset his third book. “there must precise relation between its components, the case those well-shaped man.”', 'vitruvius described great detail the proportions this “well-shaped man” that should inform the design temple. the distance from his chin the top his forehead should one-tenth his whole height, began, and proceeded with many other such notations. “the length the foot one sixth the height the body; the forearm, one fourth; and the breadth the breast also one fourth. the other members, too, have their own symmetrical proportions, and was employing them that the famous painters and sculptors antiquity attained great and endless renown.”', 'vitruvius’s descriptions human proportions would inspire leonardo, part the anatomy studies had just begun 1489, compile similar set measurements. more broadly, vitruvius’s belief that the proportions man are analogous those well-conceived temple and the macrocosm the world became central leonardo’s worldview.', 'after detailing human proportions, vitruvius went describe, memorable visualization, way put man circle and square order determine the ideal proportion church:', 'in temple there ought harmony the symmetrical relations the different parts the whole. the human body, the central point the navel. man placed flat his back, with his hands and feet extended, and compass centered his navel, his fingers and toes will touch the circumference circle thereby described. and just the human body yields circular outline, too square may found from it. for measure the distance from the soles the feet the top the head, and then apply that measure the outstretched arms, the breadth will found the same the height, the case perfect square.', 'it was powerful image. but far know, one note had made serious and precise drawing along these lines the fifteen centuries since vitruvius composed his description. then, around 1490, leonardo and his friends proceeded tackle this depiction man spread-eagle amid church and the universe.', 'francesco giorgio produced least three such drawings that were designed accompany his treatise and translation vitruvius. one them shows sweet and dreamy image man circle and square. suggestive rather than precise drawing. the circle, square, and body not attempt show proportions and are instead rendered casually. two other drawings that francesco made depict man more carefully proportioned inside design circles and squares the shape church floor plan.', 'around the same time, another dear friend leonardo produced drawing based vitruvius’s passage. giacomo andrea was part the collaborative circle architects and engineers gathered ludovico the court milan. luca pacioli, mathematician the court and another close friend leonardo, wrote dedication edition his book divine proportion that listed the distinguished members that court. after hailing leonardo, pacioli adds, “there was also giacomo andrea ferrara, dear leonardo brother, keen student vitruvius’s works.”', 'andrea produced simple version spread-armed man circle and square. notably, the circle and square are not centered; the circle rises higher than the square, which allows the man’s navel the center the circle and his genitals the center the square, like vitruvius had suggested. the man’s arms are stretched outward, christ-like, and his feet are close together.', 'andrea would end being killed and brutally quartered french troops when they captured milan nine years later. shortly thereafter, leonardo would search for and find his manuscript copy vitruvius’s work. “messer vincenzio aliprando, who lives near the inn the bear, has giacomo andrea’s vitruvius,” declared notebook entry.', 'in the 1980s, andrea’s drawing was rediscovered. architectural historian claudio sgarbi found heavily illustrated manuscript copy vitruvius’s tome that was languishing archive ferrara, italy. determined that manuscript had been compiled andrea. among its 127 illustrations was andrea’s version vitruvian man.', 'there are two key differences that distinguish leonardo’s version vitruvian man from those done around the same time his two friends, francesco giorgio and giacomo andrea. both scientific precision and artistic distinction, leonardo’s entirely different realm.', 'rarely display, because prolonged exposure light would cause fade, kept locked room the fourth floor the gallerie dell’accademia venice. when curator brought out and placed before table, was struck the indentations made the stylus leonardo’s metalpoint pen and the twelve pricks made the point his compass. had the eerie and intimate sensation seeing the hand the master work more than five centuries earlier.', 'unlike those his friends, leonardo’s drawing meticulously done. his lines are not sketchy and tentative. instead, dug hard with his stylus, carving the lines confidently into the page were making etching. had planned this drawing very carefully and knew precisely what was doing.', 'before began, had determined exactly how the circle would rest the base the square but extend out higher and wider. using compass and set square, drew the circle and the square, then allowed the man’s feet rest comfortably them. result, per vitruvius’s description, the man’s navel the precise center the circle, and his genitals are the center the square.', 'in one the notes below the drawing, leonardo described additional aspects the positioning: “if you open your legs enough that your head lowered one-fourteenth your height and raise your hands enough that your extended fingers touch the line the top your head, know that the center the extended limbs will the navel, and the space between the legs will equilateral triangle.”', 'other notes the page provide more detailed measurements and proportions, which attributed vitruvius:', 'vitruvius, architect, writes his work architecture that the measurements man are distributed this manner:', 'the length the outspread arms equal the height man.', 'from the hairline the bottom the chin one-tenth the height man.', 'from below the chin the top the head one-eighth the height man.', 'from above the chest the top the head one-sixth the height man.', 'from above the chest the hairline one-seventh the height man.', 'the maximum width the shoulders quarter the height man.', 'from the breasts the top the head quarter the height man.', 'from the elbow the tip the hand quarter the height man.', 'from the elbow the armpit one-eighth the height man.', 'the length the hand one-tenth the height man.', 'the root the penis [il membro virile] half the height man.', 'the foot one-seventh the height man.', 'despite what stated, instead accepting what vitruvius had written, leonardo relied his own experience and experiments, per his creed. fewer than half the twenty-two measurements that leonardo cited are the ones vitruvius handed down. the rest reflect the studies anatomy and human proportion that leonardo had begun recording his notebooks. for example, vitruvius puts the height man six times the length his foot, but leonardo records seven times.', 'in order make his drawing informative work science, leonardo could have used simplified figure man. instead, used delicate lines and careful shading create body remarkable and unnecessary beauty. with its intense but intimate stare and the curls hair that leonardo loved draw, his masterpiece weaves together the human and the divine.', 'the man seems motion, vibrant and energetic, just like the four-winged dragonflies that leonardo studied. leonardo has made sense, almost see, one leg and then the other being pushed out and pulled back, the arms flapping flight. there nothing static except the calm torso, with subtle crosshatch shadings behind it. yet despite the sense motion, there natural and comfortable feel the man. the only slightly awkward positioning his left foot, which twisted outward provide measurement guide.', 'to what extent might vitruvian man self-portrait? leonardo was thirty-eight when drew it, about the age the man the picture. contemporary descriptions emphasize his “beautiful curling hair” and “well-proportioned” body. vitruvian man echoes features seen many assumed portraits him, especially bramante’s depiction heraclitus, which shows leonardo still beardless about that age. leonardo once warned against falling prey the axiom “every painter paints himself,” but section his proposed treatise painting called “how figures often resemble their masters,” accepted that was natural so.', 'the stare vitruvian man intense someone looking mirror, perhaps literally. according toby lester, who wrote book about the drawing, “it’s idealized self-portrait which leonardo, stripped down his essence, takes his own measure, and doing embodies timeless human hope: that just might have the power mind figure out how fit into the grand scheme things. think the picture act speculation, kind metaphysical self-portrait which leonardo artist, natural philosopher, and stand-in for all humanity peers himself with furrowed brow and tries grasp the secrets his own nature.”', 'leonardo’s vitruvian man embodies moment when art and science combined allow mortal minds probe timeless questions about who are and how fit into the grand order the universe. also symbolizes ideal humanism that celebrates the dignity, value, and rational agency humans individuals. inside the square and the circle can see the essence leonardo vinci, and the essence ourselves, standing naked the intersection the earthly and the cosmic.']
industry has experienced tremendous turmoil the past few years, and with tremendous turmoil comes new strategies, which put publications’ online experiences front and center. websites are being redesigned, and mobile apps are being created left and right, which means the news industry ripe with opportunities for designers with vision.', 'before you can have vision though, you need lot inspiration, which why wrote this post. it, highlight and comment the best news apps and websites from around the web. some the designs are captured from live products, and some are still development.', 'ready, set, find your vision.', 'tubik’s chief product officer created this news portal. she illustrates great way display sectors and transitions between scales. often news portals hide their navigation tools when entering and leaving content. this can leave user disoriented and confused about where they are the interface relative the rest the content. this interface always keeps its menu around, but nicely transitions into full screen view well.', 'the idea ranking content not necessarily new, many different platforms have utilized some sort upvoting before. however, rating system for articles similar rotten tomatoes interesting. the age content overload, readers appreciate knowing whether article worth read not. upvoting systems reduce content overload, but this ranking system suggests organizational structure for articles that will worth reading well after they have been published.', 'the transition between calendar and main headlines offers alternative way consume content. although this news platform specific concert hall, suggests how similar institutions might align news content with upcoming events. the headline feed offers the featured content quickly, while the zoomed out calendar provides broader scope other programming.', 'both google newsstand and trello cards inspired this design. can you tell? salomon’s intent was reconsider the pull gesture. typically, the pull gesture used refresh the page. salomon instead directs navigation multiple directions and scales all with the single gesture type. the result smooth transition between menu and content.', 'this editorial prototype focuses more aesthetic design choices rather than architectural ones. the design harkens the style conventional print media, and result, gives the content serious tone, which many news portals lack. the serif font, which has suited mobile, easier read over extended period time than the serif fonts, which are more common most digital interfaces.', 'this relatively stripped down iteration news portal. the context often overly designed interfaces, this actually somewhat refreshing. for users who just want read, this interface does just that. the gentle contrast the text light gray background provides more comfortable reading experience for long form content, and images are removed from the article readers can focus on, well, reading. the hero image provides the necessary visuals straight away, which removes any need for additional imagery set into the article.', 'this interface well suited for the user quickly scanning headlines, rather than someone interested long read. the permanence the menu the side suggests need quickly switch between each portal, scan headlines quickly while transit between meetings.', 'yahoo’s news portal unique because automatically generates its content sampling sources from around the internet. yahoo extracts the essential pieces information images, quotes, maps from stories around the web. then, small editorial team writes brief summary. this results makes for date and effortless reading experience.', 'this app, timeline, does not just provide news stories, but generates additional articles historical context produce more depth reading experience. timeline the perfect app for those who want more meaningful news content. the app has its own award winning editorial team that produces exclusive articles.', 'the interface allows readers scale between the details story, zoom out the historical timeline topic scan other recent related articles.', 'this interface removes category pages. its place, the content organized within single news feed and each article tagged topic. result, users can personalize their feeds fit their unique interests. despite the mix content single feed, the design nicely unifies the different topics overlaying vibrant color scheme. often, uncurated newsfeeds feel illegitimate disorganized. this interface solves that with its underlying tag system and well-considered color scheme.', 'this wide-range news uis proves there are infinite solutions for designing successful interface. each offers unique solution whether was offer clean organization method, new way generate content, even just intuitive reading experience. so, did you find your vision?']
hey get their first job, many people go, “finally, can stop reading. can stop learning.” =', 'in our society, it’s truism everyone first needs years schooling before they can start contributing society. when we’ve reached this performance-phase, quit learning.', 'your diploma was entry ticket the real world. signals that you’re ready participate. play with the big boys.', 'as psychologist anders ericsson puts peak:', 'we only learn until feel like we’ve hit “good enough” point. soon feel like we’re good enough (subconsciously consciously) stop improving.', 'when exit campus (or whatever), disembark from the ship personal growth.', 'when you think about it, that’s strange.', 'in his tedtalk, researcher eduardo briceño provides empirical support for ericsson’s assertion, showing that their entry ticket hand, having earned the right to, many folks really stop evolving:', '“research shows that after the first couple years working profession, performance usually plateaus. this has been shown true teaching, general medicine, nursing and other fields, and happens because once think have become good enough, adequate, then stop spending time [learning].”', 'after going through school, end with pre-packaged set beliefs about how everything gets done. following these rules seems get paid, and don’t want uncertainty, stick it.', 'the way we’ve organized education around continuous ‘ending points’ such tests pass, which cumulate into graduation and then you’re ‘done’ normalizes the “good enough” attitude eriksson describes.', 'we all know someone who’s been the office for years and claims have years experience, but actually has one year repeated times.', 'but don’t blame yourself. blame ‘the system’. (no, really.)', 'the larger issue here how the strict separation learning and participating ingrained into how we, societal level, have set division between education and working.', 'this ‘only-learn-as-necessary’ attitude gets transmitted the system itself because the ‘school-as-entry-ticket’ model makes learning out have instrumental function.', 'these days, will not the test, don’t study the chapter. our job doesn’t require it, don’t learn the skill.', 'this what happens when you make learning about competition, scores, metrics and targets.', 'when comes personal development, tests have counterproductive effect.', 'they make studying primarily about checking box. about reproduction instead independent thinking. learning something annoying but can done with this stupid subject forever soon manage get enough multiple choice questions right.', 'what the tests suggest that there are learning paths you can ‘complete’. after exam, you have achieved something and then you can stop. after graduation, you’re done.', finite game played for the purpose winning, infinite game for the purpose continuing the play. schools are form finite game, the degree that they give ranked awards those who win degrees from them. those awards qualify graduates for competition still higher games, like prestigious colleges, and then professional schools beyond that, with continuing sequence higher games each profession, and forth. james carse, finite and infinite games', 'while this dichotomy between ‘learning’ and ‘doing what you’ve learned’ fundamental for the way organize schools, doesn’t make any sense.', 'what really pick the classroom?', 'as college graduate, your only acquired skill you have mastered how reproduce unusable information pre-determined time you can make tests. that’s about it.', 'in today’s school system, there exaggerated focus abstract, contextless knowledge. all these multiple choice exams aced personality psychology, group psychology, clinical psychology that was 95% psych undergraduate but hardly provided the skillset needed psychologist out there the real world.', 'the modern obsession with theoretical knowledge is, many fields, farce.', 'for example, the idea that you’re suited run bank country virtue being “highly educated”, and you having acquired all sorts tricks “lead” from the textbooks you studied, without this being accompanied certain personal development, bullshit.', 'how did ever think that management theories, communication theories, and behavioral science theories are more important for the interaction between people than empathy and (self-)understanding?', 'okay, we’ve taken brief look (a) how we’ve drawn this unnatural division between [education before participation] and [stop growing when good enough], and (b) what skill actually learn school.', 'our system encourages instrumentalist mindset about the value learning. (i) focus too much theoretical, propositional knowledge and (ii), accordingly, stop ingesting ourselves with boring textbooks once we’ve passed the course got the job and don’t all there won’t test the first place.', 'when you think about this, it’s really weird, right? but here the part that truly makes sad.', 'our knowledge society has made education into product you can acquire without becoming wiser person. mistakenly confuse intelligence with having theory, theory you can store libraries, that you can buy and sell, display and market the shop window, which you can offer young people management training, lecture halls.', 'sadly, they then think that, with such theory hand, they’ve grown. while, fact, sold them nothing but bunch hollow words, certificate for the wall.', 'and having done so, heartbreakingly, have also made them believe that learning not about personal development.', 'but that what all about!', 'there pure joy, sweet, childlike delight, that comes from just learning and trying get better. looking back, you will find that the best years of, say, coding drawing scuba-diving belly-dancing were those you spent the learning curve, when there was exaltation the mere act doing.', 'the joyfulness infinite play, its laughter, learning start something can’t finish. james carse, finite and infinite games', 'if could push button that would get 10k medium followers and all the intellectual development for free, right now, would not push it.', 'this might sound counter-intuitive, but think about for second.', 'imagine your greatest goal whatever is. now imagine instantaneously achieving it.', 'would you happy? perhaps the beginning, but not for long.', 'now consider school. your child could take pill get him the cognitive and physical progress instantaneously, straight off the labor market, would you want her take it?', 'the right answer, case you were wondering, no.', 'that, believe, reveals something deep about human nature. shows that the means-ends mindset regarding learning that we’ve incorporated our society out tune with why value development.', 'self-improvement essential component the good life.', 'learning not only valuable because you can pass tests the end it. humans are creatures with intrinsic inquisitiveness. schooling, ideally, enables you exercise your capacity for understanding, facilitating and encouraging continuous (self-)discovery. now, does the opposite: restricts curiosity and creativity.', 'if people continue learn until they die, then education can’t preparation for entering society, and our entire approach completely wrongheaded.', 'education leads toward continuing self-discovery; training leads toward final self-definition.— james carse, finite and infinite games']
lot 2019. and know that reading more widespread new year’s resolution people who are into personal growth.', 'that’s why want share the highlights out the thousands pages consumed 2019.', 'you might find this article inspires you read some these books, you might take away some golden nuggets that can transform your life for the better.', 'for 2020, don’t have any particular reading goal don’t feel like reading lot itself could improve life any further. it’s more about putting all learnings into practice.', 'honestly, not all the books i’ve read were worth it. some didn’t tell anything new, and some just didn’t fit current situation state.', 'that’s why picked the most exciting and valuable ones share with you.', sure that all these can massive game-changer, long you don’t just skim through them, but put the information into action.', '“happiness doesn’t just flow from success; actually causes it.”', still remember reading this book new year’s eve last year. was the first book finished 2019, and was totally worth it.', 'it’s one the books that overloaded with post-its because there are many incredibly valuable learnings inside.', loved reading it, and remember how disturbed boyfriend every few minutes because had tell him something new that just discovered through this book.', 'if you are reading tiny amount books 2020, please put this one your reading list will worth it.', '‘buy experiences, not goods. want buy happiness? then spend your hard-earned cash experiences. out for meal. concert, cinema theatre. holiday. and learn how pole dance. paintballing. bungee jumping.', 'in fact, get involved anything that provides opportunity things with others, and then tell even more people about afterwards.', 'when comes happiness, remember that experiences that represent really good value for money.’', '“be more intentional about who you want become. have vision beyond your current circumstances. imagine your best future self, and start acting like that person today.”', 'this book another highlight list, and you ask me, it’s absolute must-read for anyone who working personal development.', 'if could, i’d probably force anyone read this book.', have been into personal growth for quite some time, and i’ve consumed lots content, yet, high-performance habits surprised many significant ways.', 'it’s not easy-to-read book, and doesn’t really make sense read this one without putting the lessons into action. however, you take this book seriously, sincerely believe can change your life.', '“seek clarity. generate energy. raise necessity. increase productivity. develop influence. demonstrate courage. these are the six habits that you need adopt you are reach high performance any situation.”', '(you can even order high-performance habits for free.)', 'let’s stick with habits here’s one more that can advise.', '‘your morning ritual what sets you for having successful day. it’s one the most important habits cultivate, it’ll set the precedent how your day will look. the saying goes, “how you start the day how you’ll end the day.”’', genuinely believe the power proper morning routine.', 'the saying ‘’your morning determines your day’’ absolutely accurate, and huge fan structured, powerful mornings.', 'in his book, stefan james shares ideas how start your day right. some might sound repetitive, yet excellent base for creating your own, great morning ritual and putting into practice.', '‘love the life you have while you create the life your dreams. don’t think you have choose one over the other.’', 'when talking about morning routines, definitely can’t miss out this one.', 'in fact, i’m not sure you truly need read the whole book. good summary might enough get the key insights. yet believe that the miracle morning still serves complete guide for creating life-changing morning routine.', 'according hal elrod, your morning routine should consist six components:', '‘remember, the moment you accept total responsibility for everything your life the moment you claim the power change anything your life.’', 'the third door tells the story 18-year-old’s wild quest interviewing many the world’s most successful people discover what takes get the top.', 'alex banayan openly shares his story meeting some the world’s most successful entrepreneurs and what learned from them.', 'throughout his journey, banayan talks with bill gates, warren buffett, tim ferriss, and many more inspiring and highly successful entrepreneurs.', '‘maybe the hardest part about taking risk isn’t whether take it, it’s when take it. it’s never clear how much momentum enough justify leaving school. it’s never clear when it’s the right time quit your job. big decisions are rarely clear when you’re making them they’re only clear looking back. the best you can take one careful step time.’', 'while this book full golden nuggets, also very nice read one can truly resonate with banayan’s journey.', '‘you can’t control how you feel. but you can always choose how you act.’', 'for those who don’t know her:', 'mel robbins, the author the second rule, one the best paid female motivational speakers. through her ted talk, which summarizes her second rule, she went viral and became known for her work.', 'i’ve known the second rule and mel robbins long before read the book, and don’t think that you need read the book understand and use the concept. however, believe the rule itself can lifechanging; that’s why put the book this list.', 'in fact, the second rule can taught very short way: the moment you have instinct act goal you must count 5–4–3–2–1 and physically move your brain will stop you.', 'robbins teaches and empowers take massive action, despite all the excuses you might find.', 'the second rule great way eliminate excuses and finally all the things that you know you should doing.', 'even genuinely admire her work and the rule, think that reading brief summary watching one her videos least powerful reading the book. that’s mainly because significant part the book consists success stories her clients and readers, which fantastic, yet doesn’t teach you anything new.', '“what you believe has more power than what you dream wish hope for. you become what you believe.”', 'this one absolute favourite books ever.', genuinely admire oprah and everything that she created despite the hard times she had face the beginning her life. what know for sure, oprah summarizes everything that she learned throughout her life.', 'of course, you also get read few personal insights about her life, but the learnings shared are incredibly powerful and make worth reading the whole book.', 'oprah also unfolds all her values, beliefs, and everything that somehow influenced her life.', '‘there one irrefutable law the universe: are each responsible for our own life. you’re holding anyone else accountable for your happiness, you’re wasting your time. you must fearless enough give yourself the love you didn’t receive’', 'this book not only delightful read but also packed with knowledge that can help you change your life for the better and live more intentionally and happily.', '‘thoughts become things. you see your mind, you will hold your hand.’', 'most people know bob proctor from the film the secret.', 'however, this man might living legend has been studying the law attraction and rules success for more than years. bob proctor years old and still rocking stages worldwide through his seminars.', 'this book teaches you everything you need know put the law attraction into practice your own life.', 'what liked most that it’s written way that very hands-on and practical. while proctor talks about how the universe always working your favour, also shares practical tips that you can immediately use improve your life and wealth.', 'i’ve been following bob proctor for many years, yet this the first book his that i’ve read and highly looking forward reading all his other books 2020.', '‘to believe the things you can see and touch belief all; but believe the unseen triumph and blessing.’', '(if you sign for his newsletter, you can download the ebook for free.)', '‘believing the key everything life. you want become successful anything, then you must absolutely believe and know for fact that you will achieve it’', 'matching the last book mentioned, this one also teaches the law attraction and how manifest your wildest dreams into your reality.', 'the author doesn’t only teach universal laws like the law attraction, but also shares practical tips how apply these laws every day.', 'if you haven’t done far, strongly recommend learning about the law attraction and practicing your everyday life. this book great place start.', '‘the sun just close enough the earth sustain life and have moon, which gives just enough light when the sun goes down. with all this perfection around us, what makes think that god has made the world unfair? actually, nothing unfair all.', 'this world was made completely and one hundred percent fair everyone, just was made that everything works together like the inside old grandfather clock.’', '‘a queen goes for what she wants and does not ask for permission.’', 'for girl boss like me, this book was must-read.', 'elena and grant cardone are the ultimate power couple and are running billion-dollar empire with several businesses. thus, thought could learn lot from her. and did.', 'yet, course, big part the book about her personal life. you want surprise girl boss get insight into how the cardones’ work and marriage life looks, you don’t have much lose.', '‘self-esteem strongly associated with happiness, psychological resilience, and motivation live productive and healthy life.’', 'i’ve also read few books confidence and self-esteem. this one great for discovering practical ways increasing your (or others’) self-esteem and confidence.', 'before getting started, schiraldi teaches what true self-esteem actually is, followed great ways building it.', '‘self-esteem essential our health, coping abilities, survival, and sense well-being.’', 'these are the solutions self-esteem suggested the author:', '‘confidence crucial happy and fulfilling life. influences your success work, your family life, relationships and leisure activities. affects your performance everything you do. belief oneself without doubt the greatest asset all.’', 'this book ultimate guide for building slow but lasting confidence. the author provides complete program personal transformation through just few minutes work each day.', 'the book structured into themes (chapters) and comes with tons exercises that help you strengthening your self-esteem.', '‘people who lack confidence and self-belief always underachieve.’', '‘achievement requires continuous feedback. and you’re going get the most out your people, it’s imperative that you the one who the most what the numbers are and what they mean.’', 'in reading this book, came realize that sometimes it’s the small steps that matter. the authors provide 100 easily applicable strategies how motivate others and produce better results.', 'if you are currently building leading team, you want improve the work produced existing team, this book might just golden nugget. you’ll learn how focus people’s strengths, hold them accountable, and cultivate the art supportive confrontation.', '‘simplify. focus results. you will always get what you focus on. you merely focus activities, that’s what you’ll get…a whole lot activities. but you focus results, that’s what you’ll get. whole lot results.’', 'want more? download collection 40+ lessons from bestselling books.']
while back, our team polled over 1000 people who invested personal development seminars/ courses, set goals, and worked those goals for days. the data from those polls was pretty shocking- 96% their personal development efforts completely failed.', 'there’s joke that goes “i’m opening gym called resolutions. will have exercise equipment for the first two weeks and then turns into bar for the remainder the year.”', 'it’s funny because culturally, know it’s thing- but quantifying helped understand what extent. but what exactly the reason for this? and more importantly, how can prevent it?', 'much this has with your personality types. just like our bodies wildly vary size, likelihood heart disease, and fat retention, our personalities are much the same way. let’s start with breakdown the major types people run into.', 'these types have natural bias towards action. and large, these are the people who hit their goals. many imperfect actions will get you far further than not doing anything all. fact, daily habit writing training the gym just that- taking action, rarely ever perfect, day after day. these people are likely change whether they read the self-help book, the seminar, not. but they still read books and attend conferences because they understand and practice the principle the slight edge: the little things they repeatedly lead big changes their lives.', 'this group people change because the effort they put into their personal development. taking big action doesn’t come naturally this group, does for the first. the right seminar, coach, teacher mentor lights fire under their ass, they change and they become people the first group. often that nudge, initial momentum enough get people moving. this tricky place because while external motivation fine get started, these people will have find the discipline stay top their habits- especially for the majority the time when they don’t feel motivated. for this group, optimizing their environments key. more that shortly.', 'dan kennedy says good amount the people that buy his products never remove the shrink-wrap. there are other people who spend their entire lives going from one personal development seminar another, but nothing ever changes.', 'these people believe the myth the “i’ve made it” moment. they think that the next course, book, seminar will transform them instant, into the kind person who the first second group. it’s likely that the majority the revenue generated the personal development industry comes from this group people. for this group especially, the environments are absolutely critical.', 'regardless where you are these groups, the key stacking the odds your favor get rid everything that may take away from your mission- which takes into the importance environments.', 'if you’ve ever been motivational seminar conference, you’ve probably experienced the incredible “high” that occurs the end it. you feel like you’re ready conquer the world and accomplish anything. you’ve probably also noticed that few days after the event over the buzz wears off and everything back normal.', 'this happens because you from being immersed intense uplifting environment, back your normal environment. and your normal environment has all sorts subconscious triggers and behaviors that are associated with it. make mistake- environment stronger than willpower and when it’s bad, whatever change you’re hoping make won’t stick- the vicious personal development cycle starts all over again.', 'first, you have become aware the environments that make your life, and then design environment that conducive the person you want become. the best part upgrading your environments doesn’t require you buy mcmansion and drive tesla- doesn’t have cost anything.', 'if you’d like self-audit your environments understand exactly how your own environments are helping sabotaging your growth, sign here and i’ll send over.', 'any the following are simple environmental upgrades that you can make little cost.', 'some expensive, but incredibly effective ways upgrade your environment include moving different city attending events like jayson gaignard’s mastermind talks, where the room filled with amazing people. make the changes you’re able make now. but recognize that spending money this stuff like investing your own stock- put the work in, and it’s very profitable long term.', 'each time you upgrade one environment, all the others will impacted. the main reason that most personal development efforts fail because most try add bunch new workouts and routines their lives. and the process, completely fail take into account the impact their environments. they really are that important.', covered about the environments here because these three will create impacts your life relatively quickly- but others make deeper, lasting impacts. i’ve written about all environments another post, which you can find here.', 'if doing the best work your life important you, you’ll love free guide: “optimizing productivity creativity.”', 'the tactics i’ve packed into this guide allowed write over million words the last years. what could for your life’s work? don’t miss it.', 'like the article? click the below share with others medium.']
'when comes self-development, it’s the small stuff that often makes the biggest difference.', 'too often, people think about big changes terms big decisions. they think it’s sweeping action that moves the needle, when really it’s the incremental steps made day-to-day basis. success, then, has far more with daily habits not home runs.', 'so, how you accelerate your own personal development?', 'by focusing the small things:', 'no matter what, decisions have made here first.', 'check them with logic, run the numbers make sure things make sense, but doesn’t feel right, probably isn’t.', 'trust that.', 'learning doesn’t happen standstill.', 'if you ever feel stuck, really stuck, then let trying find the answer and ask yourself how you can just keep the wheels moving. what can you do? even doesn’t make sense, it.', 'keep moving.', 'the people you confide in?', 'the people you trust?', 'the people you share everything with?', 'protect that with your life.', 'as soon you let toxicity in, becomes difficult get out. protect yourself and the people around you being aware the energy people bring the table.', talented creative without business sense lost expressionist.', talented businessman without pulse for creativity box.', 'if you truly want successful, you need elements both.', 'you are what you read.', 'so what you’re reading your facebook feed, stop. it’s the material you let into your brain that influences the work that comes out.', 'read healthy.', 'listen your body.', 'if you are hyped and making progress project, maybe you can get with less sleep for few days. you’re exhausted and borderline sick, reel back and sleep for day two.', 'give your body what needs, when needs it.', 'you’ll spend less time playing damage control later on.', 'the more you appreciate life, the more life turn appreciates you.', 'throughout your day, look for many things possible appreciate from your loved ones, your significant other, your friends, the work you’re doing, etc.', 'this will keep your energy open receiving more and more positive energy.', 'people say ignore what you’re bad and all-in your strengths.', 'in general terms, agree. but that doesn’t mean basketball player ignores their left hand and only practices lay-ups with their right.', 'always aware your weaknesses and find ways train them into becoming secret weapons.', 'people who have strong elements discipline know the value doing one thing, every single day.', 'because not only are you improving that one thing, but you’re practicing the habit good habits.', 'find something that’s meaningful you and make daily practice. will eventually become the foundation for everything you do.', mentor someone who you connect with mutual way, and from whom you can learn accelerated rate.', 'mentors are not people you walk and ask for help. there has genuine connection, and you have find mutual value spending time together.', 'so, find mentor, first look who already close you, and then think what you can bring the table warrant that learning experience.', 'we forget how much day and often don’t give ourselves enough credit.', 'at the end the day, take ten minutes write entry your journal. look for things that went well (and pat yourself the back), and look for things you can work for the day follow.', 'there’s value acknowledging both.', 'now that social media has been around for minute, are starting realize that, great tool, it’s disastrous for our focus.', 'in distracted world, being able have clear vision for what you want and not getting pulled away every time notification goes off huge advantage.', 'master technology don’t let technology master you.', 'reading one the best ways learn from the past and anticipate the future.', 'if you aren’t reading book every two weeks, minimum, every month, you aren’t reading enough.', 'exercise your brain keeping good books your smartphone, and instead scrolling through instagram, read page two while standing line the grocery store.', 'whatever your craft is, you have make time study and take information, much you work creating.', 'it’s balance input and output.', 'without input, your output will suffer.', 'dressing for success real thing.', 'part developing yourself person starts with how you take care and present yourself.', 'you’ll struggle take those leaps life you’re not feeling great about yourself.', 'it’s crucial have people your life who can call you out when you’re underperforming, lying yourself, changing for the worse.', 'these are the people who should members your inner circle. allow them give you feedback along the way.', 'the more distractions you let into your life, the harder will for you focus the things most important you and change for the better.', 'keep things simple. maybe this means not having television your bedroom, saying social events during the week.', 'either way, just know the value your time and invest accordingly.', 'if you’re always the move, use travel time your advantage.', 'podcasts can great way continue giving yourself more input.', 'load few onto your phone and make use those hours spent transit.', 'as own mentor said me, “if you can’t measure it, don’t it.”', 'track your efforts and find ways keep tabs how you are progressing whether that means keeping closer watch your projects, being more aware your daily habits.', 'at the end the day, nothing can take the place you believing wholeheartedly yourself.', 'if you can’t that, you’re going struggle from the start.', 'you have believe where you’re going before anyone else can.']
'personal development abstract topic, which means different things different people. and there’s singular strategy for measuring it.', 'what does “personal development” mean? the word implies that there’s progression it. that’s the case, what stage are you now? i’ll briefly answer those questions this article. equipped with that information, you can improve yourself more effectively.', 'when talk about personal development, i’m talking about the activities that will make you reliable human being. someone you can count on.', 'to me, it’s the modern version philosophy. ancient rome, philosophy was mostly practical pursuit. there were actual schools where you could study the art becoming better person.', 'along the way, we’ve turned philosophy into academic pursuit. it’s turned into analysis who said what, and why.', 'the word philosophy comes from the greek word φιλοσοφία, philosophia, which means the love wisdom. historically, philosopher was practitioner the knowledge they possessed.', 'well-known ancient philosophers like aristotle, socrates, seneca, epictetus, buddha, confucius, were all practitioners their knowledge they practiced what they preached. this trend remained true until the 19th century.', 'modern philosophers like william james and sigmund freud all practiced philosophy. they mostly had other jobs. james was psychologist and later became teacher. freud was neurologist.', 'but the 20th century, philosophers became talkers knowledge. philosophy became academic career didn’t matter whether you practiced your knowledge. why important know this history? all have thirst wisdom, need get from somewhere.', 'so when philosophy started changing last century, other people filled the gap. who were those people? started with napoleon hill, wallace wattles, earl nightingale, jim rohn, and other figures who are now active the personal development space.', 'instead going ancient school philosophy, join online communities, read blogs, and learn from each other. the goal become better, more reliable, human being.', 'i’ve identified four stages personal development. awareness these stages help understand where are our journey towards becoming better person. understanding where you are, you can take the necessary steps your personal development.', 'all growth comes from pain. without reason pursue self-actualization, never start. every person goes through period darkness and challenge their lives. this where most discover the power self-development.', was always interested productivity, business, and personal development. but didn’t take seriously until 2014/2015. was going through personal challenges like dealing with loss, lack career perspective, break up, back pain, you name it. none those challenges were huge themselves, but the combination was tough. some point, you start looking for answers.', 'around the same time, brother was also going through that phase. shared books and inspired each other learn more.', 'once you discover the world personal development, you become hopeful. you realize, “hey, can turn life around. can become better, stronger, more reliable.” you whole consumption spree.', 'you read books, blogs, listen podcasts, watch documentaries your thirst for knowledge endless. when you’re this stage, keep drinking from the well knowledge, friend.', spent about months consuming everything could. mean that literally. was reading, listening, and watching inspiring things all day long. read books week, journaled least hour day, and listened podcasts watched interviews every hour.', 'but you can’t that forever. some point, you want live what you’ve learned. you start applying your personal life, health, career, business, etc. you start seeing changes. you embody the knowledge you’ve acquired.', 'once you’ve learned and applied your knowledge successfully, you want share with others. this could with your family, friends, co-workers, team, strangers.', 'not everyone who goes through the stages self-development becomes teacher profession, but everyone i’ve met who improved themselves, also wants inspire others the same. you don’t have tell others improve.', 'just setting the right example, you’re inspiring others how the same. me, that’s the real purpose teaching.', 'finally, these stages are not mutually exclusive. depends the area you’re focusing on. one might stage three when comes personal productivity, but stage one when comes developing self-reliance.', 'this sums the four stages self-development. we’re lucky, can spend the majority our lives the final stage. but all stages are great places be. beats “stage which where the majority the population live state unawareness. anything beats that!', 'especially learning. that doesn’t excite you, nothing can!']
ted dawn that was actually really tired trying better, that all the things was doing weren’t necessarily making stronger. there was lot dependency external input, what call the paraphernalia the new age. and wasn’t hard see this. but wasn’t just that was feeling that way. was really and all girlfriends. every time get off stage the women would come and i’d hear the same things. basically, we’re really tired. and this not the point, further fatigue, berating yourself. i’m pretty sure that this not the point walking the spiritual path. danielle laporte the unmistakable creative.', 'given that i’ve spent the last decade broadcasting other people’s wisdom, reading self help books and writing some them myself, this probably seems like odd thing for say. but for many us, the fundamental premise our personal development efforts that are some way deficient broken. few things contribute our misery like sense deficiency.', 'throughout life i’ve felt deficient some way another:', 'because this sense deficiency, joined cult that later became known the seduction community, wrestled and off with depression, and read 100’s self help books. could probably open therapy practice living room with the books shelf. i’ve chased women who weren’t into when should have just walked away and met someone who was actually excited about having their life.', 'when the fundamental premise your personal development efforts that you are broken some way and need fixed, you end perpetuating that reality.', '“as you label object situation” appears say the authors the three laws performance. how you label your current situation? problem you have fix opportunity for growth? our words are the building blocks reality.', 'when feel deficient some way, our focus what lack. our default narrative one not enough. don’t have enough, aren’t good enough, etc, etc. this narrative blinds all should grateful for. blinds our gifts and causes see the world through the lens our weaknesses.', 'one the strange paradoxes personal development that order make change, have begin accepting the way things are, even they are not ideal our liking. you can attempt make change from place resistance place acceptance.', 'when you attempt make change from place resistance, everything uphill battle. you feel desperate and hopeless. but when you make change from place acceptance, experiences and circumstances flow through your life. you don’t hang onto anything.', 'your realize the only thing worth giving your energy what you can control.', 'my friend kamal ravikant has famously said love yourself like your life depends it. sometime last year started see energy healer. after years skepticism about inspiration and new age bullshit, drank the encinitas kool aid. our sessions centered around one thing: impression myself. truth told, was struggling with impression myself. occasionally, still do. sometimes hate brain for the fact i’ve dealt with depression and forget that it’s the same brain that allowed write books and interview 700 people.', few months ago, was having conversation with amber rae about her amazing book choose wonder over worry. she was having lunch with seth godin and when asked her about book marketing she laughingly said want sell million copies.” but what struck most what seth said her. said “you’ve already won. you got the book deal, you wrote the book, and have amazing fiance.”', 'in the midst own book launch, this something i’ve had keep mind. the desire sell many copies possible can cause you overlook opportunity practice gratitude:', 'when you’re caught the round funding you haven’t raised, the startup that hasn’t grown fast you’d like the bestseller list you didn’t hit, it’s easy delude yourself into thinking you’ve lost, and overlook all the ways which you’ve won.', 'the constant effort improve ourselves world driven self help books, podcasts, life hacks, list posts, life coaches, thought leaders, and unicorn startup founders can exhausting.', 'when the standard which measure our lives never ending parade accomplishments and accolades, becomes all too easy prioritize what author and new york times columnist david brooks calls resumes values over eulogy values.', 'in our desperate striving for excellence, paradoxically reduce its likelihood. perhaps it’s time shifted the fundamental premise personal development from you’re broken and need fixed you’re good and aspiring great.']
'what this dark art personal development you speak mr. tim? put simply; it’s the thing that will change your freaking life for real. joke.throw away the college books and forget about google because all you need understand personal development.', 'it’s become obsession and it’s what every single day that have air lungs. it’s the difference between the losers and the winners that wake a.m. with their game face ready obliterate their goals with elon musk like way doing things.', 'you aren’t broken, and can fix you. heck, can fix each other! empty your beer the sink, grab green juice and let’s knock the benefits personal development out together.', 'here are the nine reasons why became obsessed with personal development and you should too:', 'i’m only preaching this magical thing called personal development because works. didn’t work, then would shut the hell about it. it’s because works though that scream from the rooftop wake and get the bandwagon.', 'it’s the one thing tried which actually worked. all the woo-woo chanting, affirmations and pretend positive thinking did nothing! it’s all hoax. before personal development, had ugly scarcity mindset. when learned believe the greater good and change the way think, everything changedand believe the same can happen for you, amigo.', 'from the outside, appears that personal development all about you. the deeper you get into it, the quicker you realize that it’s about serving others.your success about what you for others. before you can anything for others, though, you have get yourself order.', 'after you learn the basics, you’ll longer settle for selfishness inflated ego. all you’ll think yourself “how attract like minded people come and change the world with me?”', 'if had break down personal development into one piece information would this; it’s all about progress. that’s it. you make one small change per day towards your vision and then you take action. the action you take automatic and often requires almost thought.', 'the lack thought comes from trusting yourself and learning not over-think. you start see results, guess what? it’s addictive. you become addicted success.', 'all you need master your life commit being just little bit better than you were yesterday. don’t fall for the delusion that you need make humongous changes every day because you don’t. you try and that early your transformation, you will burn out and give up.', 'start small. try lot’s new things and act like kid again that doesn’t give damn about anything other than having fun and discovering new things.', 'before drank the personal development kool-aid, everyone around was ordinary. they were all failing and like me, they were pretending they weren’t. together would post silly photos nightclubs sculling beer and pretending life was great. wasn’t. were miserable.', 'when started learning about personal development, met others the same situation. together, grew and smashed our goals. like self-fulfilling prophecy, cool people magically started entering life because they wanted share the good vibes.', 'like attracts like, you want attract the dregs infectious energy that will propel you beyond your wildest dreams?', 'before personal development, would experience pain like everyone else, but then would allow myself suffer. the pain guaranteed, but the suffering choice. default reaction pain was let consume me, and had other references get out tough situation.', 'after beginning embrace personal development, learned the ancient art that goes back thousands years and has never really changed. then began embrace fear and become vulnerable. learned that our flaws are what make awesome and should never ashamed them.', 'pain still comes around, it’s just now have the tools deal with it.', 'our mind’s software millions years old, and it’s never had update. through personal development, you learn how force software upgrade and understand the flaws the way are designed. the flaws are not all bad and are often there protect and shield from danger.', 'without going into the whole subject our brain, the most important thing you will learn that our mind spends most its time thinking negative thoughts. the default response our brain any situation, without intervention, think negative way. wonder we’re messed up.', 'by simply understanding this fact, and learning how override the autopilot mode, you can win back your happiness, take back your life, and kick some serious butt!', became obsessed with personal development because taught avoid negative people and not try and please everyone. even with personal development, some people will refuse change. it’s their choice, and should respect that.', 'while you should never let money your driving force, personal development will double not triple your income. that’s what it’s done for and i’m positive can the same for you. customers and companies want pay you bucket loads money when you become magnet for everything that good this world.', 'the feeling infectious and everyone wants around it. the money can help you make bigger impact and enjoy life more. can give you the resources you need extraordinary things. most all, you’ll realize, the money means nothing, and you feel the same. all that matters your dream.', 'it’s very easy take what have for granted. all want more money, sex, power, and good feelings. when your mind shifts from wanting more realizing you already have enough, subtle shift starts occur.', 'you’ll start grateful and express your gratitude towards others more often. you’ll learn secret weapon which that whenever you feel horrible, you can shift your state practicing gratitude.', 'in states gratitude, the world slows down, your mind stops racing ahead and you see beauty the simple pleasures life. now that’s something celebrate.', 'this column was originally published entrepreneur.com', 'copyright 2016 entrepreneur media, inc. all rights reserved.', 'if you want increase your productivity and learn some valuable life hacks, then subscribe private mailing list. you’ll also get free ebook that will help you become game-changing influencer online.']
this dark art personal development you speak mr. tim? put simply; it’s the thing that will change your freaking life for real. joke. throw away the college books and forget about google because all you need understand personal development.', 'it’s become obsession and it’s what every single day that have air lungs. it’s the difference between the losers and the winners that wake a.m. with their game face ready obliterate their goals with elon musk like way doing things.', 'you aren’t broken, and can fix you. heck, can fix each other! empty your beer the sink, grab green juice and let’s knock the benefits personal development out together.', 'here are the nine reasons why became obsessed with personal development and you should too:', 'i’m only preaching this magical thing called personal development because works. didn’t work, then would shut the hell about it. it’s because works though that scream from the rooftop wake and get the bandwagon.', 'it’s the one thing tried which actually worked. all the woo-woo chanting, affirmations and pretend positive thinking did nothing! it’s all hoax. before personal development, had ugly scarcity mindset. when learned believe the greater good and change the way think, everything changed and believe the same can happen for you, amigo.', 'from the outside, appears that personal development all about you. the deeper you get into it, the quicker you realize that it’s about serving others. your success about what you for others. before you can anything for others, though, you have get yourself order.', 'after you learn the basics, you’ll longer settle for selfishness inflated ego. all you’ll think yourself “how attract like minded people come and change the world with me?”', 'if had break down personal development into one piece information would this; it’s all about progress. that’s it. you make one small change per day towards your vision and then you take action. the action you take automatic and often requires almost thought.', 'the lack thought comes from trusting yourself and learning not over-think. you start see results, guess what? it’s addictive. you become addicted success.', 'all you need master your life commit being just little bit better than you were yesterday. don’t fall for the delusion that you need make humongous changes every day because you don’t. you try and that early your transformation, you will burn out and give up.', 'start small. try lot’s new things and act like kid again that doesn’t give damn about anything other than having fun and discovering new things.', 'before drank the personal development kool-aid, everyone around was ordinary. they were all failing and like me, they were pretending they weren’t. together would post silly photos nightclubs sculling beer and pretending life was great. wasn’t. were miserable.', 'when started learning about personal development, met others the same situation. together, grew and smashed our goals. like self-fulfilling prophecy, cool people magically started entering life because they wanted share the good vibes.', 'like attracts like, you want attract the dregs infectious energy that will propel you beyond your wildest dreams?', 'before personal development, would experience pain like everyone else, but then would allow myself suffer. the pain guaranteed, but the suffering choice. default reaction pain was let consume me, and had other references get out tough situation.', 'after beginning embrace personal development, learned the ancient art that goes back thousands years and has never really changed. then began embrace fear and become vulnerable. learned that our flaws are what make awesome and should never ashamed them.', 'pain still comes around, it’s just now have the tools deal with it.', 'our mind’s software millions years old, and it’s never had update. through personal development, you learn how force software upgrade and understand the flaws the way are designed. the flaws are not all bad and are often there protect and shield from danger.', 'without going into the whole subject our brain, the most important thing you will learn that our mind spends most its time thinking negative thoughts. the default response our brain any situation, without intervention, think negative way. wonder we’re messed up.', 'by simply understanding this fact, and learning how override the autopilot mode, you can win back your happiness, take back your life, and kick some serious butt!', became obsessed with personal development because taught avoid negative people and not try and please everyone. even with personal development, some people will refuse change. it’s their choice, and should respect that.', 'while you should never let money your driving force, personal development will double not triple your income. that’s what it’s done for and i’m positive can the same for you. customers and companies want pay you bucket loads money when you become magnet for everything that good this world.', 'the feeling infectious and everyone wants around it. the money can help you make bigger impact and enjoy life more. can give you the resources you need extraordinary things. most all, you’ll realize, the money means nothing, and you feel the same. all that matters your dream.', 'it’s very easy take what have for granted. all want more money, sex, power, and good feelings. when your mind shifts from wanting more realizing you already have enough, subtle shift starts occur.', 'you’ll start grateful and express your gratitude towards others more often. you’ll learn secret weapon which that whenever you feel horrible, you can shift your state practicing gratitude.', 'in states gratitude, the world slows down, your mind stops racing ahead and you see beauty the simple pleasures life. now that’s something celebrate.', 'copyright 2016 entrepreneur media, inc. all rights reserved.']
'for the last few months, i’ve been the experimental “personal development editor” for medium members. medium gave budget “find articles that actually change people’s lives.” it’s $5/month for everything below plus every other topic medium’s been producing for members.', 'so went looking for authors that had done more than read about someone else’s success. every article below based applied experience that led big success. then, the editor, hammered every author explain every step the process that got them that success. you read one these articles, there should zero missing steps just follow what they did.', 'below are everything i’ve published far. this sales pitch for why you should sign for medium’s membership right now.', 'this topic we’re just breaking the ice on. the following are two quantified-self style reports from people who’ve tried this diet approach.', 'the roots procrastination start the emotional centers our brain. normally, won’t even notice subconscious emotions that trigger it. thankfully, there are number tested tactics reduce and maybe even cure procrastination.', 'this series starts with the world’s leading researcher procrastination, followed applied tactics from top coaches, and then ends with science fiction piece about what would happen could design device that would apply these tactics for us.', four part series from architect who specialized applying scientific research productivity, creativity and flow. all donald rattner, aia.', 'hacks, tips, assessments there’s ton you can maximize your productivity.', 'this the “teach person fish, feed them for lifetime” section. the lessons these articles could help any your goals.', 'the angle take “help person who worships competence succeed world designed for hubris.” want live world led people who got there through competence.', always ask people who care about productivity, “to what end?” the following articles are the closest we’ve gotten answering that question purpose.', 'honestly, thought this section would lot longer given how much personal interest have. oops! these three are great though.', 'well not everything has category yet.']
motivational statement comes down three words: “you’re gonna die.” i’m not trying scare you i’m being practical. you get one life and one chance make yourself happy. instead sitting and complaining about not pursuing the things you want life, something about it.', 'too many people focus other people’s happiness when they should focusing their own. you know why like making other people happy and motivating them succeed? because i’m already happy. might sound selfish, but the first person you need make happy you. (then you can make other people happy.)', implore you honest with yourself and ask the things you are doing will put you position succeed. not just the business world, but life. when you’re happy life, you realize that how you make your money much more important than how much you make.', 'in early 20s, spent enormous amount time surrounding myself with people their 90s. whether met them while traveling working the wine industry, would ask each one them tell about their life. they all started with these two words: wish.” some wished that they had worked harder, some wished that they spent more time with loved ones, and some wished that they did what they wanted instead listening their parents. they wished, they wished, they wished.', 'if there’s one thing learned hanging out with these old-timers, it’s this: there’s better time act than now.', 'if you’re your early 20s, this your moment. this not the time try practical and maximize your money you can buy something flashy like fancy car right out school. this the time realize that you have five-year window (give take) for you attack the life that you want win. travel with buddies and experience the world, start band hone your talents, start networking while you’re still living apartment with eight other people. since most you have major life commitments, this the time take the chance the life you want.', 'even you’re your 40s, 50s, 60s, older, there’s still time make yourself happy. you want that badly, you can get it. instead retiring and taking golf, maybe it’s time triple down and really focus what you want. live world today where there much opportunity available us, especially with the internet. gives access more ways pursue the things that care about the most.', 'bottom line: are all going die someday. matter your age, you have the time make yourself happy. we’ve never had more opportunities open than now create the life want.', was compelled write this post because it’s reaction what i’ve been observing over the past couple years. there’s this tendency people have pass over opportunities when they think they can just “come back later.” people are living their lives like they have unlimited time. all know that’s not true.', 'if can just get one person change their behavior, have that one conversation, take that one chance, i’ll glad wrote this. because the end the day, we’ve only got one bat.', '“you’re gonna die” should motivate you every morning get out there and get what you want done. you get one life one chance. the biggest poison encounter humans regret, stop making excuses and start making yourself happy.']
has moments life that are not good. some point, all get unmotivated. that time, you will probably meet people who will try get you back track giving you lot advice.', 'these people will mean well, but many times they will give you remarkably wrong tips.', 'the problem that these people are simply repeating advice they’ve heard conferences from motivational speakers authors. these tips that many people follow will unfortunately not allow you regain your motivation.', 'in what follows, will over very popular motivational tips that will probably lead you disaster.', 'many people keep saying that the key success write down your goals life. the more clearly and precisely your goals are defined, the greater your chances achieving them.', 'to support their statements, these motivation experts usually rely experiment done with the yale class 1953.', 'the study asked graduating yale seniors they had specific goals they wanted achieve the future that they wrote down paper. twenty years later, the researchers found that the students who had specific goals written down paper were richer than the 97% other students.', 'this would seem prove that writing down your goals the key success.', 'unfortunately, it’s not that simple. course, having specific long-term goals important. however, this guarantee success. other words, being specific important, but not enough.', 'your motivation will not increased tenfold. you will have find something else.', 'when person has trouble motivating themselves, they may feel afraid doing something wrong. the fear failure prevents this person from taking action. facto, you will try reassure this person saying:', '“just your best!”', 'theoretically, this takes the pressure off the person receiving this advice. reality, rather ironic way, will produce the opposite effect the one desired: will more less give that person permission mediocre.', 'several researchers have successfully demonstrated that simply trying your best keeps you from reaching your full potential. setting very high goals, you will have work harder, while being even more focused. putting more effort into very high goal will really help you perform your best.', 'so never hesitate pursue goals that may seem too high first.', 'you’ve probably already read napoleon hill’s bestseller “think and grow rich”. this book, which love, napoleon hill extols the virtues positive mental reinforcement become rich. you must visualize every day the goal you want achieve.', 'this the best way achieve success according him.', 'so some people think that motivate yourself, you have visualize your success. this approach has its merits, but again, not enough. constantly visualizing your success, you will omit all the efforts and failures that will probably precede your future success.', 'as result, you will have harder time dealing with your failures. you must understand that overnight successes only exist for those who have built them for many years beforehand. like laying the foundations your success through hard work.', better mental approach visualize your success, but more importantly, all the obstacles and problems you will have face achieve it. you will much better prepared for the harsh reality the road success.', 'success life within the reach all those who can make the necessary efforts for sufficiently long period time. resilience and patience are two essential parameters that come together with unwavering motivation.', 'for those who have motivation problems, the temptation strong apply ready-made motivation tips like the ones just revealed.', 'applied without further work, these tips will probably lead you disaster. optimism important, but nothing without real preparation for all the obstacles and challenges you will have face. your best interest cultivate more realistic approach things make the best use your abilities succeed.', '(disclaimer: this story contains affiliate links. you choose purchase after clicking link the author may receive commission additional cost you. thank you for your support!)']
trend motivational psychoanalyses coming into play many not consider this emotion possible factor towards performance. there are many types characteristics that come into play when comes anger everyone can portrait anger different ways. but think that comes down categories that can help the breakdown the different characteristics that form the personality person and therefore the act this emotion.', 'people who are able control their emotions when state anger and people who don’t. the way which the emotion controlled most important. anger controlled does not away, like kinetic energy that used matter what. just kinetic energy, that anger that controlled held the person until the bursting point when the jar just spills over the top. but rather than keeping anger until the bursting point how about consuming this anger different way.', 'to put this into perspective need few ordinary scenarios. let’s take for example unfairness. job offer has been brought your attention but even after great interview someone else got the job and this will cause state anger let’s say, you are more qualified than the person. rather than just consuming yourself and you’re energy with anger how about consuming this anger towards energy and motivation?', research conducted november 2010 the association psychological science, researchers find that associating object with anger actually makes people want the object kind motivation that’s normally associated with positive emotions. looking your life and comparing person that might having higher quality life compared you would make you angry into wanting the luxuries that others have and you not. therefore emotionally motivates you strive towards better quality life.', 'this ideology does quite bit towards locke and latham goal-setting theory (1990). the anger must concentrated target specific goal. the more intense the emotion the more focused the person should towards that specific goal. anyone can and will argue that difficult set smart goals whilst under heavy emotions however does very well meet the first the principles presented the theory.', '1. clarity', '2. challenge', '3. commitment', '4. feedback', '5. task complexity', 'as have discussed previously how anger focusing your mind onto specific goal, which the clarity represented this ideology. will very challenging under heavy emotions but, the heavier the emotions the more motivation. well commitment which think very good mix with anger.', good example this would people that participate different types sports where they have train extensive hours become better. they are most the time bursting with “controllable anger” created their fitness trainers order help them focus their training well motivate them overall.', 'the only limitation this would that anger also provokes pessimistic state mind. more people tend give something then they get angry rather than motivating themselves more keep trying. this may caused approaching the problem with the wrong mindset.', 'anger portrayed around more often than think however, different personalities will exhibit anger with different emotions. you may not see the anger person could even hide under another emotion. people that tend have the best control their anger are able because they hide better yet said, convert their anger into depression. this showing how anger can converted into different element (emotion positive action).', very interesting theory that goes adequate perspective with this would the recalibration theory anger. this computational-evolutionary model that maintains the function anger which recalibrate individuals who place insufficient weight the welfare the angry individual when making decisions any irrational actions.', 'this theory refers more uncontrollable anger and how individuals with such anger are convicted into this state mind. person has negative opinion individual’s interest this will cause trigger within the state mind and then just complex equation how important the specific subject touched upon the negative opinion over the weight set the individual’s anger order trigger violent aggressive action. this action triggered that the future the opposing individual will see the angry person’s interest more valuable.', 'the way that this theory implemented with the ideology withholding the weight created within the state mind to, later on, used towards motivation represent not only better state mind towards the oppressing party but also indirectly avenge the negative opinion individual. most the perspectives would refer arguments that end aggression but have talked previous article there gain for such however, individuals with uncontrollable anger may not see it.', 'the trigger which causes mass effect anger can determined something that has previously happened individual’s life and has left mental scar. such action can happen then would individuals able experience high level long term motivation caused something happening their life?', 'being hurt mentally may affect someone rise above the situation above the oppressing party order not only heal from such mental scar soul pain but also, show yourself that individual you can much more the point where motivation comes from the inner-self. always try keep stable state mind and stay motivated.']
advice can seductive. from motivational quotes magazine profiles, there’s persistent narrative that you follow your passion, log hours week, and “hustle hard,” you’ll create the next amazon airbnb.', 'it possible.', 'we all know that hard work can produce incredible results. but the prevailing rise-and-grind mythology often pushes founders into business before they’re ready.', 'many smart, ambitious people feel pressured quit their jobs and all-in. they work around the clock, sacrificing their health and happiness chase startup dream.', 'for every founder who’s battling exhaustion and surviving protein bars, i’d like suggest different path.', 'it’s the same path that enabled build jotform wildly competitive industry, where even google vying for our market share. since 2006, we’ve grown serve 4.2 million users and create team 130 employees and we’ve done without taking penny outside funding.', 'jotform isn’t overnight success story, and certainly don’t have private jet. but, i’ve built business love, while maintaining freedom and rich personal life.', 'bootstrapping can great path for entrepreneurs every kind. here’s what we’ve learned and how can help you achieve success your own terms.', 'many founders think venture capital prerequisite for success. reports record-breaking funding rounds and billion-dollar valuations can certainly make seem that way.', 'but investment isn’t the only way fund business.', growing number founders, “bootstrappers” are building their companies with little outside funding. they don’t have fuss over investment decks and most could care less about reaching the top techcrunch very few worry about creating personal brands instagram especially the early stages. they’re more concerned about serving real customers, who support their ideas with hard-earned cash.', 'they might not visible entrepreneurs who spend fortune agencies, but every industry, you’ll find independent, self-funded companies that are also wildly profitable. for example:', 'mailchimp co-founder and ceo ben chestnut needed create email newsletters for his design consulting clients. built tool streamline this tedious process, and created business worth $4.2 billion with $600 million annual revenues.', 'todoist market leader productivity, used over million people and organizations including apple, starbucks, google. amir salihefendic launched its parent company, doist, 2007 and says “we’re running marathon, not sprint.”', 'basecamp started 2004, when jason fried and his web design firm needed project management app keep them organized. they built internal tool, started using with clients, and now have nearly 2.2 million customers and employees cities worldwide.', 'these are just few businesses that are racking customers and profits rival their vc-backed competitors. one key difference? they get call the shots about when, where and how they work and grow. many the founders also build their empires quietly, with more concern for creating great products than generating market buzz.', 'clearly, bootstrapping isn’t for everyone. not every business can self-funded, and sometimes, outside investment exactly the right choice. all need chart our own paths. but bootstrappers remind question the prevailing startup narratives and ask, “do really need raise money?”', 'it’s well worth taking breath, setting the pitch deck aside for moment, and considering alternative route.', 'starting business isn’t easy. there are risks, challenges, and complications, whether you leverage your own cash you pursue venture capital. reading headline after headline about record-setting funding rounds, however, can make backing look glamorous and perhaps even necessary.', 'most can name the well-funded success stories: facebook, google, whatsapp, alibaba, rent the runway, uber, and more. but for every famous brand, there are thousands vc-funded firms that quietly grew and then fizzled. that’s why it’s good take clear-eyed look the statistics.', 'research harvard lecturer shikhar ghosh reveals that about 75% vc-backed companies the u.s. fail, meaning they don’t return the investors’ capital. define failure not delivering the projected return investment, however, then more than 95% startups fail, says ghosh.', 'just like bicycle, startup requires some speed stay upright. but once founder accepts outside cash, the clock really starts ticking.', 'here’s another way think about it. funding the fabled hare, then bootstrapping the tortoise. it’s slow and steady, but keeps going (and going and going).', 'we know that premature scaling the number one cause startup failure. eager new founders often drain their cash big offices, the latest technology, splashy and marketing campaigns, and hiring full teams long before they’re ready even need the support. sometimes their investors push for these outward signs accomplishment.', 'bootstrappers rarely face the same pressures. they don’t have meet arbitrary timelines show hockey stick growth charts. instead, they have the freedom set their own targets. they make the rules, and, most importantly, they decide what “success” looks like even that definition constantly evolving.', 'clearly, bootstrapping doesn’t eliminate all problems. grow business without external funding, you have swim, you’ll sink fast. you have creative and strategic, but that can also make you better entrepreneur. here are three more advantages taking the self-funded route.', 'it doesn’t matter you’re designer, product engineer, developer, specialist. bootstrapped founder, you’re probably also shipping packages, answering calls, and writing social media posts. that’s how goes. and while spending precious time the “other stuff” can frustrating, ensures you understand every corner the business. once it’s time hire someone for that role, you know exactly what look for and what avoid.', '*quick tip: jotform, hire and grow slowly. and hire someone only when have their entire first-year salary the bank. it’s simple rule thumb that has helped keep track.', 'the classic (or clichéd) startup office former industrial space with exposed beams and high ceilings. it’s bright and shows the company doing. big. things. until business truly needs that kind space, however, it’s not smart expense.', 'it’s easy get distracted, but bootstrappers can make strategic choices, like using open-source software and upgrading later, necessary. working from home, renting desk co-working space, and doing the and accounting until you can afford get help.', 'in the early stages startup, the business still pliable. you can release product, gather user feedback, and adapt real market needs. that’s advantage.', 'entrepreneurs often chase perfection, but it’s not only impossible; can put your company risk.', 'new founders should release their products soon possible. don’t even try make perfect. hundreds startups have adapted and pivoted their way success:', 'when startups work obsessively create the “ultimate” first release, they can also tempted argue with their customers even when customers share honest feedback about what they want and need. that’s why staying lean and flexible can major business advantage.', 'after college, spent five years working programmer for new york-based media company. learned much there: how mentors accomplished their goals and how collaborate with team members. also saw how micromanagement destroys staff motivation. most importantly, that’s where got the idea for jotform.', 'both startup press and social media often advise founders leap blindly into business soon they have idea. that approach can work, but it’s tough slog that kills lots promising companies. instead, there are five steps you can take right now lay the foundation for lasting success.', 'writing manifesto and leaving your job with flourish, jerry maguire-style, might seem like badass entrepreneurial move. unfortunately, didn’t even work for jerry.', 'most bootstrappers test the waters with side project while they hold down full-time gig. they leave the safety regular paycheck only when that side hustle can provide viable, long-term income. spacex, apple, product hunt, trello, wework, craigslist and twitter all started this way.', 'never underestimate how much you can learn and accomplish 9-to-5 job and let’s all agree stop saying “day job” like it’s four-letter word. getting paid sharpen your skills healthy, productive company can provide great foundation for whatever you’re building.', 'at google, employees can spend 20% their time exploring new ideas creative projects. this 20% time policy well known tech circles, but it’s concept can all apply our work lives.', 'we can build entire businesses tinkering the side, but most importantly, side projects boost creativity. when there’s pressure meet revenue target (or make any money all), we’re free play, explore and learn. it’s great way decide whether the project truly captures your imagination, and gauge outside interest.', 'in fact, side projects should stupid, says ex-spotify product designer tobias van schneider:', '“the only way side project will work people give themselves permission think simple, change their minds, fail basically, not take them too seriously.', 'when you treat something like it’s stupid, you have fun with it, you don’t put too much structure around it. you can enjoy different types success.”', 'we should never afraid invest time and energy into something that excites us; something that gets the blood pumping and our creativity flowing. follow curiosity and see where leads.', 'and enabling “stupidity” doesn’t work, trying looking the side project through more scientific lens.', 'don’t focus the outcome how the experiment will received. just start.', 'even before it’s done, and long before it’s “ready,” need share our ideas. show people what you’ve been working this was one the strategies that helped land our first 1,000 users. take them inside the experiments you’re running, matter how early unpolished.', 'today, there are many different and inexpensive ways share. pick your favorite platform the one that feels natural, and where you spend time anyway. could youtube channel, instagram account, podcast, even blog. have blog medium but could whatever other network that works for you.', 'the simple act sharing can help you to:', 'as collect that paycheck and play with new ideas, it’s the perfect time learn. never before have there been many expert voices and resources, right our fingertips. can take online courses, read blogs, watch videos, attend meetups, listen interviews, and read books. find mentors (both real and virtual) and soak every bit knowledge possible. then, apply what you lean and keep experimenting.', 'contrary prevailing wisdom (and motivational quotes), the best startups aren’t driven passion; they solve problems. built jotform eliminate friction point that experienced firsthand, while working the media company.', 'back the late ’90s, building custom web forms was tedious and time-consuming, envisioned drag-and-drop tool that anyone could use. knew people wanted the product, because solved problem struggled with every day.', 'investor and combinator co-founder paul graham says the most successful business ideas share three common features: they’re something the founders themselves want, that they themselves can build, and that few others realize are worth doing.', '“the verb you want using with respect startup ideas not ‘think up’ but ‘notice,’” writes graham. “at call ideas that grow naturally out the founders’ own experiences ‘organic’ startup ideas. the most successful startups almost all begin this way.”', 'ask yourself:', 'what problems have you experienced the world?', 'what problems you have with products, services, and even yourself?', 'problems need smart solutions. passion just the icing the cake.', 'the rxbar also came from personal need. company ceo and co-founder peter rahal wanted deliciously simple protein bar free chemicals synthetic ingredients. so, developed nutritious bar that would satisfy the crossfit-going, paleo-eating crowd and himself.', 'rahal and his business partner, jared smith, scratched their own itch. basecamp founders jason fried and david heinemeier hansson write their bestselling book, rework, “the easiest, most straightforward way create great product service make something you want use.”', 'once you have prototype, it’s time ensure you have eager customer today not sometime the future.', 'if you can’t answer the question, “who needs this right now?” might not viable business. for example, rahal kept re-mixing his recipes until they tasted incredible. didn’t stop until knew people would pay for the product and tested that threshold selling the bars door door, packaged only tupperware.', 'using what you create can game-changer. and sounds simple; after all, who wouldn’t use the product they built? but startup has many moving parts that founders can quickly become detached from their original mission.', 'once product service shipping, it’s important stay close the heart your offering. use it, consume it, order it, and dig into the details. engagement puts you back the customer’s shoes, you experience any problems firsthand. also keeps the team (no matter how small) its toes.', 'additionally, the startup was built scratch your own itch, there are always more opportunities extend the solution. ask yourself:', 'how else could this product serve me, personally?', 'what would make this solution more valuable both current and potential customers?', 'very few problems life are tackled once and solved forever. startups aren’t stagnant, either. they need evolve with needs, culture and markets. when you keep mining the problem (and the solution), can keep the business fresh and vibrant.', 'sonny and cher. bert and ernie. calvin and hobbes. thelma and louise.', 'pop culture loves good duo. does the startup world.', 'investors like paul graham often want back businesses run partners with complementary skills. apple, for example, paired the late, sales-savvy steve jobs with steve wozniak, who focused technology.', 'but when co-founders don’t gel, the results can disastrous. “startups the relationship between the founders what dog does sock,” says graham. “if can pulled apart, will be.”', 'according noam wasserman, professor harvard business school, 65% high-potential startups fail due conflict among the founders. wasserman studied 10,000 entrepreneurs for his book, the founder’s dilemma, and suggests that multiple founders bring more skills the table, but they also have more potential for disputes over money, strategy, leadership, credit, and other issues.', 'it makes sense. multiple founders can get behind the wheel, but they have agree the destination, plus everything from who’s the back seat the best driving route. many founders also have strong desire for freedom, which can quickly feel stifled when someone else weighs every detail.', '“picking co-founder your most important decision,” says naval ravikan, co-founder the angellist platform. “it’s more important than the product, market, and investors.”', 'ravikan makes bold statement. not everyone would agree that the partnership matters more than the product the market. but starting business massive commitment. you’re picking someone with whom share your life’s work. you’ll also share money, space, risk, and whole lot time.', 'the right partnership powerful. working with the wrong person can feel heavy and frustrating (at the very least) and, the worst case, can destroy the business.', 'that’s why founders’ agreement should excruciatingly detailed. hire experienced lawyer, you this route, and plan for everything: equity breakdown, vesting schedules, intellectual property, termination clauses, and more. ensure that everyone clear the terms and feels fully protected, should the partnership south.', 'if you’re not sure about potential co-founder, there’s reason rush. explained why you don’t need co-founder start your own business take your time and see how feels work your own.', 'forget what the vcs say especially you’re prepared bootstrap. ravikan says, “if you’re compromising, keep looking. company’s dna set the founders, and its culture extension the founders’ personalities.”', 'entrepreneurs who trust themselves solo are often rewarded with the ultimate freedom. spanx founder sara blakely, for example, built global company without co-founder any outside investment. age 41, she became the youngest self-made female billionaire and she still owns 100% the company.', 'entrepreneurs, all people, should know that rules are meant broken. that’s half the fun. so, partner stay solo, but your terms, with your eyes wide open.', 'most startup experts worship the altar rapid expansion. they even have pattern for it, called “hockey stick growth,” which occurs when revenues start out flat and then quickly shoot create that iconic curve.', '“aiming for hockey-stick growth, while being aware the predictable stages growth, exactly what successful entrepreneurs should do,” writes entrepreneur bobby martin, author the hockey stick principles .', 'investors dream about rapid growth, too. they want recover their money fast, they often pressure companies expand quickly.', hockey stick looks great paper, but typically requires the business grow revenues first and figure out profits later. that can put the company risk. bootstrappers take the opposite approach. they sort out profits first and stay focused that key goal.', 'slow growth takes patience and good dose bravery. it’s normal feel some fomo you watch other firms double, then triple their staff overnight. but slow growth can provide stability. also enables founders sleep well night, spend time with the people they love, and create products that attract loyal, satisfied customers.', 'here are four more reasons take the slow road.', 'bootstrapping math pretty simple: spend less than you earn and you can grow your own pace. it’s simple, but it’s not effortless.', 'when celebrate companies that raise millions and post huge vanity metrics, like user acquisitions, that math can seem almost too simple.', 'glorifying hockey stick growth also implies that you can chase flashy numbers now and worry about profits later. today’s market, it’s not uncommon hear the question, “how, exactly, they make money?”', 'but profits provide freedom even when they’re modest. make decisions that keep your company the black, right from day one. after all, bootstrapped business needs work, because there are hefty bank deposits fall back on.', 'newly-funded companies often face pressure fill every seat immediately. “hire fast, fire faster” has even become startup mantra. there’s sense that christmas coming, santa better hire many elves possible. doesn’t matter they’re out work february.', 'building the right team essential. these are the people who will build and nurture the product. they’ll implement new ideas and interact with customers. todoist founder amir salihefendic says, “optimize output. don’t optimize the number people you hire.”', 'caring about customers good for business. that’s not tagline; it’s effective way bootstrap. vc-backed companies often start out with deep knowledge their audience. over time, though, it’s easy confuse what customers want with what investors want.', 'if you believe that growth reigns supreme, then will quickly become the primary focus.', '“traction and product development are equal importance and should each get about half your attention,” says gabriel weinberg, successful ceo and the author traction. “this what call the percent rule: spend percent your time product and percent traction.”', 'very few people are born knowing exactly how lead design, code, market, sell, and build. aggressive growth can quickly highlight those knowledge gaps, which are totally okay. most people launch businesses create smart solution, not because they want run staff meetings.', 'growingly slowly enables you learn alongside your team. you can learn how manage and motivate those people, too. mistakes can also smaller when you’re not feeling the heat from investors, you suddenly see new faces the office, all eager for direction. take your time and you can:', 'customers. focus funding options, it’s easy leave end users out the conversation. even the term “users” dehumanizes the people who will buy what create. but bootstrapped companies ultimately answer their customers, not investors. have obligation listen closely customer needs feedback and ideas and that’s good thing.', 'even criticism great for business, because pushes the team stretch and innovate. customer-funded growth keep honest; they ensure don’t stray off track. that’s powerful advantage.', 'never assume you know what customers want; you have look the data. we’re lucky live era where can create hypothesis and then test without overt bias. making product change? release small group and establish clear way measure user reactions. apply what you learn and test again.', 'testing doesn’t mean you’re beholden customer whims, either. you create the “what,” and customers help show you “how.” for example, airbnb’s mission create world where people can belong through healthy travel that local, authentic, diverse, inclusive and sustainable.” how, exactly they that still the smart people running the company.', 'according surveys conducted for american express:', 'the numbers are clear: customer service matters deeply. support teams much more than resolve tickets and answer tedious questions; they have massive effect company growth.', 'sexy customer acquisition stats usually get the spotlight, but it’s better spend time, energy, and money satisfying existing customers than winning over new ones. fact, data shows that it’s anywhere from times more expensive acquire new customer than keep current one.', 'extraordinary customer support doesn’t even require extraordinary efforts; you just need consistently exceed expectations:', 'bootstrapping not great way get pr. and most self-funded entrepreneurs are too busy refining their product worry about landing magazine covers.', little publicity certainly never hurts but what does the attention really especially it’s about the business, not the product itself? most customers don’t read industry tech publications anyway. once the attention fades, you’re still left with the same mission and the same challenges.', 'highly-publicized funding rounds can also put you under microscope. for example, nasty gal founder sophia amoruso made headlines 2016 when her fashion brand filed for chapter bankruptcy protection, after raising $65 million over years.', 'now that she’s launched new venture, called girlboss, both critics and fans are tracking her every move. many other founders have been amoruso’s shoes, too. well-funded startups that crash and burn often make headlines. with serious money often comes serious scrutiny.', 'big-time investments can supercharge the startup (for better worse), but slow growth can ensure you have sane, happy personal life even you build thriving business. here’s why.', 'most people think success requires 16-hour days. typically, the opposite true. busy and effective are not the same thing even though “busyness” has become modern-day status symbol.', '“hustle might move you forward, but doesn’t set you for sustainable success,” says kyle young, author quitterproof. “good habits are formed through consistency and repetition, not mindless effort.”', 'many the world’s greatest innovators (past and present) dedicated large amounts time simply thinking. reflecting. strategizing and planning. bill gates originally made the think week famous. now, other founders, like skillshare’s mike karnjanaprakorn, have adopted this practice. steve jobs, mark zuckerberg and tim ferrriss have also followed suit.', 'taking digital sabbath can also keep you feeling rested and ready play the long game. saturday, sunday another day your choice, avoid technology all forms. for example, power down your laptop and place safely out sight. shut off your smartphone and hide drawer. change your netflix password and then try forget it. give your brain the gift peace, and the time reflect and generate new ideas.', '51: that’s how many games mikael and niklas hed created before they launched angry birds which saved their company, rovio, from bankruptcy.', '25: that’s how many publishers rejected tim ferriss’ the four-hour workweek before harmony books offered him contract. the 2007 title has now sold over 1.3 million copies date.', '9: that’s how many months anna wintour spent harper’s bazaar before she was fired, apparently for producing photo shoots that were “too edgy.” wintour went become one the most powerful women fashion, serving vogue magazine’s editor-in-chief for over years.', 'founders are often hungry for success, but takes time. often, lots time. sustainable business model gives you the freedom enjoy the ride. you can focus building something you love, and that truly serves your customers, instead racing toward empty growth targets.', '“so, what’s your exit strategy?”', 'entrepreneurs often hear this question before they’ve earned single dollar and can disorienting. when you’re still building business you love, why would you think about selling it?', 'just there are marked differences between bootstrapped and vc-backed founders, “exit strategies” often divide entrepreneurs into two camps: those building sell, and those who are for the long run.', 'either scenario has merit. business personal, and all need make our own choices. although some bootstrappers will eventually sell their firms, they rarely begin with this goal mind.', '“what’s better than exit strategy?” says todoist founder amir salihefendic. “it’s long-term mission that your company truly cares about. it’s focusing building company that can outlast you and creating something true value.”', 'create value first and valuation will follow. bootstrapping forces you develop product that’s worth paying for instead trying reach the top techcrunch building house cards shaky foundation.', 'as mentioned building startup for years: how win the long game you can retain your values, freedom and flexibility. you can learn from slow-burning journey. you can focus the long-term rather than the short.', study from the national bureau economic research found that unicorns (private companies valued above billion) are roughly 50% overvalued. they’re not generating billions dollars revenue, but thanks deep-pocketed investments, paper valuations swell reach that 10-figure sum.', 'relying purely estimates can risky, because sky-high valuation demands rapid scaling. and the sky suddenly falls, vc-backed startups are often left vulnerable position. warren buffet once said, “it’s only when the tide goes out that you can see who’s been swimming naked.”', 'the media may glorify fast movers and big wins, but playing the long game another type victory. fact, slow growth doesn’t have mere consequence bootstrapping; can smart, deliberate choice.', 'if you measure success against lofty goals, it’s easy feel discouraged along the way and devastated you don’t reach them all. instead, each new milestone can something celebrate.', '“there power small wins and slow gains,” says james clear. “this why average speed yields above average results. this why the system greater than the goal.”', 'it’s worth exploring asking yourself:', 'for many bootstrappers, harmonious work culture, plus total creative and financial freedom the ultimate compensation.', 'in the hard-driving startup world, “culture” can cliché topic. tech companies became infamous for installing foosball tables and offering craft beer tap exchange for gruelling work schedules. superficial perks don’t foster culture healthy work-life balance.', 'at jotform, aim work way that’s sane, friendly and open. keep normal hours and try treat each other with deep respect. also believe actions speak louder than words.', 'enron corporation the american energy, commodities and services company had four stated values: respect, integrity, communication and excellence. but those “official” values didn’t save the company from high-profile bankruptcy and auditing scandal that sent several top executives prison.', 'culture grows through big choices, like team structure, transparency, and product-focused goals. also emerges through smaller actions, like when the founder preaches balance and leaves the office every night.', 'as you begin grow and hire team, here are five ways encourage rich, healthy startup culture:', 'bootstrapping just one way build business. capital-intensive industries such energy, transportation, telecommunications, and brick-and-mortar stores and restaurants often require funding. backing might also the best way achieve your business goals and personal ambitions.', 'for anyone who’s eager control their entrepreneurial destiny, bootstrapping can excellent choice. worked for me, and hope can work for you, too.', 'yes, takes patience, drive, and determination. but the payoffs can include freedom (both financial and personal) and better sense work-life balance. you can grow sane pace and maintain healthy personal life.', self-funded business can also achieve great financial success. might take more time, but the journey often far more enjoyable. you can develop product that improves people’s lives and build top-notch team help you along the way. you don’t have feel like imposter, either, because there’s time learn and evolve with your business, not spite it.', 'slow, sustainable growth possible.', 'stay focused your product, trust your abilities, and ask for help when you need it.', 'you can this.']
'rachel hollis problematic af. you don’t know, according wikipedia: “rachel hollis american author, motivational speaker and blogger. her first self-help book girl, wash your face since its release february 2018 has maintained spot the top best-selling books the country for seven months, held the top spot for those weeks and has sold more than 880,000 copies the united states. was the second-most popular book 2018 amazon.”', 'in short video, hollis refers livestream were she mentioned “sweet woman” who comes her house “clean the toilets.” many commenters reacted and told hollis she was “privileged af” and “unrelatable.”', 'perhaps taking her own advice and not apologizing, rachel acknowledged her privilege, but hollis made the situation worse not only calling herself “unrelatable,” but also mentioned the names other women (mostly women color) she found “unrelatable” just like her, including harriet tubman, rgb, oprah, and frida kahlo. and, blaming her team for her various blunders.', '“don’t let rachel hollis fool you with ‘i’m not trying relatable.’ after year intense public discourse race, privilege, and systemic oppression, she chose use her platform peddle the myth meritocracy and pander her target market: whiteness and privilege,” wrote writer and podcaster jen kinney.', can thank both parents for the fact that don’t look down other people. dad introduced lady poverty with aids the 80s who was patient his and profoundly changed life see the obstacles she had through. mom always talked everyone they were equals from attorneys the cleaning lady the mall.', 'various members family have had housekeeper occasion, but we’ve always thought convenience thing and not “we work harder than you”. hope rachel’s housekeeper quits.', '“rachel hollis might able afford housekeeper she ‘gets 4am and works her ass off every day’, but can almost guarantee that housekeeper does the same thing but for multiple houses day and they’ll never become ceo,” carly button shared twitter.', 'if could talk about this comment and the intersection class and race, would here for days. rachel definitely the type who would own slaves she could.', 'most success large part parents’ success and less with “working harder”. because them, could afford good education because they had the money so. life had been different, path would have been different. not say people can’t work hard achieve their dreams, but you are privileged, it’s easier. hate toxic “hustle culture”.', 'her first book, girl, wash your face, has been criticized for glorifying “hustle culture”, which illustrates lack understanding systemic oppression. “working harder” myth and only could true world where everyone was coming the same footing. needs noted that marginalized individuals have work even harder achieve success. many people color are situations beyond their control and can’t even afford the $1800+ attend one rachel’s personal development seminars, the words and thoughts are hollow.', 'the same book shares harmful content such fat-shaming and the general idea that you can simply choose happy, without any acknowledgment mental and physical health issues causing those effected believe that anyone who “unhappy” “unsuccessful” this way because lack personal responsibility. that the lie.', 'rachel was born the one the poorest communities kern county, california and has described her childhood traumatic, including brother who took his own life. seems, rachel may not have been born into wealth, but merely being white, heterosexual, able-bodied, cis-gendered woman she affordable privilege many people will never have. she moved los angeles after graduating high school and got job miramax where she met her soon-to-be ex-husband dave hollis. dave was working director new business development for the walt disney company. guess rachel wasn’t pulling herself the bootstraps.', 'rachel the epitome toxic white feminism and white supremacy tied pretty bow praises the liberation middle-class cishet white women, while never taking account the rights and needs marginalized communities.', 'when rachel says she’s unrelatable, perhaps she’s telling who she is.']
got hustle 24/7…’', '‘work hard and you’ll successful…’', '‘i want you stop watching netflix and work every single free minute you have…’', 'sounds familiar, doesn’t it?', 'nowadays, almost every motivational speaker, success guru ‘mindset’ coach blasts this message into the world and onto your youtube, instagram and facebook feed.', 'we are constantly being fed this notion that hard work the key success. all have put insane amount hours and energy into our goals and then success will magically appear our doorstep.', 'but what isn’t true?', 'what this classic piece advice doesn’t work the way everyone thinks does?', mean, think about for second. some the hardest working people our society such construction workers, farmers, firefighters and military personnel are heavily underpaid.', 'if hard work would the determining factor financial business success, these people would all millionaires. but they aren’t.', 'the belief that ‘hard work success’ simply not true. it’s false belief that can more harm than good.', 'okay, okay, have admit. even though may sound like it, i’m not anti-hard work. you need put the time, effort and energy you want achieve ambitious goals. you can’t cheat your way success playing fifa your playstation all day.', 'however, and this the whole point why i’m writing this article, there’s something missing from the ‘success equation’. something that not lot people talk about…', and that’s why many people, despite their hard work, fail achieve their goals.', 'if you want achieve anything worthwhile reasonable amount time, you’ll have start working smarter. much, much smarter.', 'if you work 80-hour workweeks but you don’t work strategically and neglect your priorities, makes sense. yet, that’s what most people do. that’s because, nowadays, putting lot hours and working hard seen badge honour that strokes the ego. however, reality, most people (not all) who wear this badge honour are simply wasting away their time working low mid-value tasks.', 'in fact, most who work hard are merely keeping themselves busy. very busy. and using busyness shield, protect ourselves from doing the things that actually should do. can hide behind hard work excuse not have look the real reasons why still haven’t achieved what thought would have now.', 'after all, are working hard right? that can’t the problem. maybe should put the blinders and just work even harder. maybe that’s the solution!', 'but the truth is…', 'hard work does not equal success. yes, can component success, but only when hard work applied the right tasks and activities. only when you combine with working smart.', 'it doesn’t matter how hard you work you work the wrong things (aka, mid-low value tasks)', 'what need instead shift our thinking. need make the shift from quantity quality. need focus the value produce instead the effort put in. that way can actually make faster and more impactful progress than ever before.', 'if you want short-cut the success process, you’ll need start focusing the value you create your hours (the quality those hours) instead the number hours your work (the quantity).', 'the number hours that you work says absolutely zilch about the value you produce day. yet, your success directly linked the value you create. and you want become more successful, you need create more value.', 'this doesn’t mean you have work more hours put more effort (although, you can). means you should focus those tasks and projects that create the most value for your company your customers and eliminate those activities that don’t create that much value.', 'the quality your output that what matters, one really cares about the number hours you worked the amount effort you put in.', 'one the best ways work smarter becoming extremely good prioritizing your work. through prioritizing, you can actually create 10x more value 3–4 hours work compared what you’d normally create entire day.', 'keep mind, not all tasks to-do’s are created equal. fact, some your tasks, projects to-do’s are 10x more valuable than others. consistently crushing those tasks what actually moves the needle significantly towards the achievement your goals. while those other lower value tasks are merely time energy consuming while not contributing that much towards the achievement your goal.', 'working hard becomes less necessary when you know what’s truly important and what’s not. when you learn what tasks and projects actually move the needle and which ones don’t, that’s when you’re actually working smart. this saves you lot time and energy while fact speeding the process towards achieving your goals.', '“there art clearing away the clutter and focusing what matters most. simple and transferable. just requires the courage take different approach.”', george anders', 'when you consistently tackle your most important tasks, there need for 80-hour workweeks. fact, working that many hours merely sign that you’re not good prioritizing and that you need become stricter about what tasks and activities you spend your valuable time and energy on.', 'one the techniques that personally use prioritize the 80/20 rule. short, the 80/20 rule states that 20% inputs are responsible for roughly 80% outcomes. other words, about 20% your tasks and activities are actually responsible for 80% your desired outcomes.', 'this means that just few things truly matter.', 'only handful tasks and activities are mission critical and significantly move the needle towards the achievement your goals. those handful tasks are the ones that you should spend the majority your time and effort on. all other tasks that not belong the top 20% should given much less time, outsourced eliminated entirely.', 'that’s how you can start free much more time, headspace and focus for those tasks and activities that truly matter. when you consistently work your top 20% tasks, you are truly being effective. that’s when your odds success increase massively.', '“things which matter most must never the mercy things which matter least .”', johann wolfgang von goethe', 'rather than crushing to-do’s day, aim tackle only tasks. yet, make sure these tasks are incredibly valuable. doing so, all the other low and mid-value tasks will either (1) unnecessary (2) much easier accomplish.', 'when you find yourself being overworked and spread too thin, you need narrow your focus those few tasks and projects that actually matter the most. therefore, i’d encourage you 80/20 analysis your work often possible.', 'first, identify your most important desired outcomes (sales, new leads etc.) and then identify which 1–5 tasks contribute the most towards these desired outcomes. those tasks should become your priorities and that’s where you should spend your time and energy on.', 'rather than following the ‘hard work success’ train thought, follow the ‘hard work smart work success’ train thought. fact, working smarter even more important than working harder. you need continuously think about how you’re spending your time, how much value you’re creating the hours that you work and whether you’re focused quality over quantity. you this consistently, your odds success will increase lot more compared just blindly working hard.', 'to your personal growth,', 'jari roomer', 'founder personal growth lab', 'download free guide ’27 productivity hacks for superhuman performance’ learn how get more results without working more hours, achieve your personal business goals 372% faster and gain more free time (without feeling guilty about it).', click here download the productivity hacks guide (free)']
'self-talk was once seen something reserved for motivational gurus—perhaps you remember the snl character stuart smalley staring into mirror and proclaiming: “i’m good enough, i’m smart enough, and doggone it, people like me!” but more people are learning that there are practical, measurable benefits adopting positive inner narrative. medium, alan trapulionis lays out the latest research self-talk—and it’s enlightening.', 'medium.com', 'psychologists have only seriously begun analyzing self-talk the last couple decades, and here’s what know:', '1) positive self-talk improves performance most sports.', '2) questions like “will this?” produce better results than statements like will this.”', '3) using “we” self-talk better than using “i.”', '4) talking about yourself third person more effective than talking first person.', '5) both motivational (“i will this!“) and instructional (“see the target…straighten elbows…lock onto target…“) self-talk seems effective enhancing performance.', 'trapulionis describes another form self-talk: reminding yourself that you’re already the person you want and now you just need the actions. during hell week, the toughest week the toughest training program the u.s. military, dan crenshaw would reminded his peers and instructors that was already navy seal all had was prove it.', 'so practice this, might tell myself something like, “will michelle clean out her pantry today? yes, she will. she’s already organized person.” will this propel it? couldn’t hurt. ryan holiday writes, paraphrasing the stoics, “we are what repeatedly do.” may just that also are what repeatedly say ourselves our heads.']
ever experienced lightbulb moment? people describe these moments sudden inspiration, revelation, recognition. experienced own lightbulb moment just few days ago was reading adam grant’s newest book, think again, which explores “the power knowing what you don’t know.”', was struck moment recognition where suddenly had the perfect words describe something that couldn’t have defined even hour before.', 'for years i’ve struggled find the perfect words summarize how approach coaching and influencing others change work. when asked about leadership style interviews, i’ve been able come close the “right” description, but i’ve never quite hit the nail the head. always walk away with nagging suspicion that the interviewer didn’t really understand what meant, and only had myself blame for that.', '“i tend influence others through questioning,” would say when asked. “rather than telling them what think outright, help them draw their own conclusions asking the questions that will help get them there.”', 'medium.com', 'that description wasn’t wrong, per se. but didn’t fully capture the nuance how influence those around me. whether i’m coaching employees, influencing peers, persuading senior leaders, there has always been more method madness than words did justice to.', 'it wasn’t until came across concept grant’s latest book that the lightbulb turned on, and suddenly had the words describe what has become the core tenet approach leading people; motivational interviewing.', 'in psychological terms, motivational interviewing “counseling method that helps people resolve ambivalent feelings and insecurities find the internal motivation they need change their behavior.”', 'and while i’m not counselor, have spent career working human resources, which means some days feel like one albeit without the degree.', 'in many ways, it’s job influence the people around change just like counselor might. whether it’s the employee who can’t seem hit deadlines, the senior leader who treats their team like garbage, the colleague whose communication style detrimental the team’s morale, job help them find better way work. leaders don’t maintain the status quo; they influence change.', 'and while i’m pretty good doing this, i’ve been really bad explaining how exactly it. that is, until lightbulb moment.', 'according grant, when comes motivational interviewing, “the central premise that can rarely motivate someone change. we’re better off helping them find their own motivation change.”', 'he says that when people ignore your advice they often isn’t necessarily because they disagree with the advice you’re giving them.', '“sometimes they’re resisting the sense pressure and the feeling that someone else controlling their decision.”', 'the process motivational interviewing relieves that pressure. and it’s only once the burden that pressure removed that person can claim the space needed explore their motivations and decide make change unbridled the expectations put them.', 'the process motivational interviewing involves three techniques which are:', 'here’s how you can use this technique help people find the motivation change within themselves.', 'those who know best will tell you that they know whether agree disagree with decision based the number open-ended questions ask about it.', 'i’ve worked for bosses that have taken much more direct approach express their disagreement with decisions. frankly, observing this taught what not do.', 'spoiler alert coming out the gate telling someone why you disagree with them and how they should think differently tends shut people down pretty quickly.', 'not only that, but usually causes them dig their heels even further, anchoring themselves their point-of-view.', 'personally, i’m less interested explaining someone why they’re wrong and justifying why i’m right. i’m much more inclined lean into humility and curiosity make point.', 'grant says, “the goal isn’t tell people what do; it’s help them break out overconfidence cycles and see new possibilities. our role hold mirror they can see themselves more clearly, and then empower them examine their beliefs and behaviors.”', 'this how influence others re-think their positions way that inspires change. using open-ended questions shine light their beliefs, grant says, “they develop more humility about their knowledge, doubt their convictions, and curiosity about alternative points view.”', 'check, check, and check. we’re well our way influencing change.', 'grant explains that “when try convince people think again, our first instinct usually start talking. yet the most effective way help others open their mind often listen.”', 'to this well, grant says need listen for “change talk,” which any talk “referencing desire, ability, need, commitment make adjustments.” when hear “change talk,” our role ask about how and why that person might make change and then listen intently and respond reflectively what they say.', 'but being quiet and truly listening are two different things. too often, listen respond. listen just enough prove our point prosecute theirs. reflective listening requires tap into our natural curiosity while simultaneously resisting the temptation fix change others.', 'it requires genuine interest understanding the human being the other end the conversation.', 'grant says that while many listeners are interested making themselves look smart, “great listeners are more interested making their audiences feel smart. they help people approach their own views with more humility, doubt, and curiosity.”', 'the result that “when people have chance express themselves out loud, they often discover new thoughts.”', 'only once you’ve established trusting relationship time engage dialogue about change. even then, it’s not about pressuring the other person accept your views. instead, it’s about having empathetic and non-judgemental discussion that affirms the person’s desire and ability change.', 'in the book, grant shares series motivational interviewing experiments. the findings showed that those who engaged motivational interviewing “felt less pressure avoid contradictions their thinking, which encouraged them explore their opinions more deeply, recognize more nuances them, and share them more openly.”', 'the thing that whether agree with someone’s decision not, their decision just that it’s theirs.', 'we’re there help them explore their opinions more deeply, free from judgment, while simultaneously affirming our confidence their ability make informed decision without our stamp approval.', 'my style influencing others has never been about being right. certainly don’t have all the answers, nor claim to.', 'it has always been about helping other people re-examine their beliefs and behaviors the spirit making better collective decisions.', 'medium.com', 'as grant says, “when succeed changing someone’s mind, shouldn’t only ask whether we’re proud what we’ve achieved. should also ask whether we’re proud how we’ve achieved it.”', 'my mini-course will teach you how better, more effective leader for your team. sign for free.']
'jump section', 'on fighting the urge follow the herd:', 'on finding the beauty chaos:', 'on persevering through adversity:', 'on following your instinct:', 'on taking charge your life:', 'i’ve never really gotten much out the inspirational quotes you can find all over pinterest instagram. me, these quotes are like candy they might give you quick boost, but they’re mostly empty calories. reminders live, laugh, and love won’t much actually change your life.', 'still, have practice collecting words from those admire and turning them challenging times. these days, i’ve been doing that more often than usual. all these quotes give perspective and remind what’s important. hope some them resonate with you, too.', 'that last line one favorite inspirational quotes all time. this isn’t ideal time for any us, but it’s the time we’re in. matter where you are life what happens, make the best it.']
'for the longest time, believed that smart people worked hard and grew reasonably nurturing environment, success would come eventually.', looked other people and thought, “wow, that person’s going great things.”', 'but grew older, realized that’s not necessarily the case. few people know who are intelligent and have strong work ethic have gone notable things, while many others are doing fine. unfortunately, there are some that drift along, unsure about what do.', then realized that there are lot factors when comes success, whether means having fulfilling career, having great relationships, staying healthy. yes, smarts are part it, and work ethic. but there’s more play than just these two factors.', 'here are seven reasons why you might not finding success even you’re smart and hardworking:', 'it’s easy stick people you’ve known for long time. you know each other’s histories and can laugh inside jokes together. the problem with old friends, though, that the same ideas are recycled over and over again, and you don’t get learn new perspectives outside your bubble.', 'it can tough reach out first new people, but starting small can help. aim for low goal initially, such introducing yourself one person week.', '“you have fight reach your dream. you have sacrifice and work hard for it.” lionel messi', 'being the same environment for long time makes hard adapt something new. the good news that change presents chance for opportunities and innovation.', 'instead resisting changes, see how you can make the best them. maybe you can cater growing businesses need see different perspective.', 'be open new concepts and curious about the world around you.', 'smart people often choose the safe route. they might follow the same path their peers choose career because it’s considered acceptable their peers.', 'while this guarantees degree security, can mundane. hear often from smart people that they find their jobs unfulfilling and that they want something else, but are afraid so.', 'if you’re thinking about branching out into unfamiliar territory, consider what your life will like decades from now you opt not pursue something. will you regret it, will you happy with your decision?', 'people that worked hard school are used being the top and told how much potential they show. this seems good initially, but there are some negative side effects.', 'i’ve heard people claim they deserve something because their intelligence where they went school. they expect things pan out automatically because their credentials. sadly, though, life doesn’t work like that.', 'in the real world, you don’t get results based the work you put in. you get results based the combination hard work, strategic thinking, and some luck involved. you can increase that last factor working the first two.', 'one thing hear often from high achievers that they hate wasting time.smart people are all too aware the value their time, time and effort spent one thing means that they could potentially missing out something else.', 'while this strong attribute, also means chasing the next big thing and not following through. starting out any field endeavor tough, and getting through the initial obstacles requires patience.', 'focusing effort one goal yields much better results the long run than going after one thing, getting bored, and then going after something new.', 'being smart and working hard can open numerous doors. unfortunately, having too many options can restricting having few choices.', 'an abundance choices makes difficult decide what do. result, it’s tempting jump around and “see what suits you”. knew someone who attended numerous graduate school programs, one after another. over ten years later, she still can’t figure out what do.', 'rather than dabbling many endeavors, suggest testing things out first. talk other people and the research before making big decision, that you know whether not option suits your personality and lifestyle.', 'surprisingly, smart people can underestimate their own abilities. they are their own worst critic, causing them believe that they can’t accomplish much they can.', 'smart people have high standards when comes their work. whenever they work project, they tend scrutinize and second-guess the final product.', 'this seems like good thing the surface, but it’s often more debilitating than helpful. perfectionism can hinder people from progressing forward their goals starting anything the first place.', '“it’s difficult believe yourself because the idea self artificial construction. you are, fact, part the glorious oneness the universe. everything beautiful the world within you.” russell brand', 'so instead letting fears “what if” “i’m not good enough” keep you back from something new, think how you want your life look like years from now. getting started beats waiting for something happen anytime.', 'what will you today get closer your success? what are some things that have been holding you back?', 'melissa chu writes about creating great work and successful habits jumpstartyourdreamlife.com. you can grab the guide how get anything you want.']
comprehensive case that has ever been made for why nearly everyone should become polymath modern knowledge economy.', '“jack all trades, master none.”', 'the warning against being generalist has persisted for hundreds years dozens languages. “equipped with knives all over, yet none sharp,” warn people china. estonia, goes, “nine trades, the tenth one hunger.”', 'yet, many the most impactful individuals, both contemporary and historical, have been generalists: elon musk, steve jobs, richard feynman, ben franklin, thomas edison, leonardo vinci, and marie curie name just few.', 'what’s going here?', 'if being generalist was the path mediocrity, why did the most comprehensive study the most significant scientists all history uncover that the were polymaths? newton. galileo. aristotle. kepler. descartes. huygens. laplace. faraday. pasteur. ptolemy. hooke. leibniz. euler. darwin. maxwell all polymaths.', 'if being generalist was ineffective, why are the founders the five largest companies the world bill gates, steve jobs, warren buffett, larry page, and jeff bezos all polymaths (who also follow the 5-hour rule)? are these legends just genius anomalies? are they people could and should imitate order successful modern knowledge economy?', 'if being generalist ineffective career path, why 10+ academic studies find correlation between the number interests/competencies someone develops and their creative impact?', '“the future belongs the integrators.” educator ernest boyer', define modern polymath someone who becomes competent least three diverse domains and integrates them into top 1-percent skill set.', 'in other words, they bring the best what humanity has discovered from across fields help them more effective their core field. hence the t-shape below. specialists, the other hand, just focus knowledge from their own field', 'since malcolm gladwell’s book, outliers, popularized the concept, many now believe that become world-class skill, they must complete 10,000 hours deliberate practice order beat the competition, going deep possible into one field. modern polymaths against the grain this popular advice, building atypical combinations skills and knowledge across fields and then integrating them create breakthrough ideas and even brand new fields and industries where there little competition.', 'for example, people have studied biology and sociology for hundreds years. but one had ever studied them together and synthesized them into new discipline until researcher wilson pioneered the field sociobiology the 1970s. also have modern tech heroes like steve jobs (who write about here) who famously combined design with hardware and software.', 'elon musk (who write about here) has combined understanding physics, engineering, programming, design, manufacturing, and business create several multibillion-dollar companies completely different fields. not only makes atypical combinations skills, also makes atypical combinations personality traits.', 'charles darwin, creator one the most important theories history the theory evolution was polymath too. steven johnson, author where good ideas come from (one top five favorite books all-time), brilliantly describes darwin’s first scientific breakthrough:', 'the idea itself drew coffeehouse different disciplines: solve the mystery, had think like naturalist, marine biologist, and geologist all once. had understand the life cycle coral colonies, and observe the tiny evidence organic sculpture the rocks the keeling islands; had think the immense time scales volcanic mountains rising and falling into the sea… understand the idea its full complexity required kind probing intelligence, willing think across those different disciplines and scales.', more everyday example longtime friend elizabeth saunders. elizabeth combined her passions for writing, christianity, and time management into thriving coaching business based principles christianity that she promotes through books and articles. there whole cottage industry around time management, but there are almost resources divine time management.', 'in order become effective online writer, i’ve deliberately combined academic research, digital journalism, and growth hacking into one skillset. didn’t college for any these skills, but practiced them over time and received coaching them. observation that academics often look down journalists; journalists look down marketers; and marketers look down journalists and academics. what many fail see that each brings something valuable the table and that all these skills combined lead great ideas seen large audiences.', '“study the science art. study the art science. develop your senses especially learn how see. realize that everything connects everything else.”', leonardo vinci', 'polymaths have existed forever indeed they are often the ones who’ve advanced western civilization more than any others but they’ve been called different things throughout history. this timeline shows the evolution over time.', 'but this recipe that most people should follow?', 'there are several significant changes trending our knowledge economy right now, which are flipping the conventional wisdom the value specialization its head. today’s world, diverse interests are not curse, they’re blessing. being polymath instead specialist advantage, not weakness.', 'people who love learning across fields can use that tendency more financially successful and impactful their career.', 'what follows the most comprehensive case for becoming polymath that has ever been created knowledge. then, the end the article, share resource with you that will help you become successful polymath.', 'scott adams, the creator dilbert, one the most popular comic strips all time, wasn’t the funniest person the world. wasn’t the best cartoonist the world, and wasn’t the most experienced employee (he was only his 20s when started dilbert). but combining his humor and illustration skills while focusing business culture, became the best the world his niche. insightful blog post, nails how did and how you can too:', 'if you want something extraordinary [in life], you have two paths:', '1. become the best one specific thing.2. become very good (top 25%) two more things.', 'the first strategy difficult the point near impossibility. few people will ever play the nba make platinum album. don’t recommend anyone even try.', 'the second strategy fairly easy. everyone has least few areas which they could the top 25% with some effort. case, can draw better than most people, but i’m hardly artist. and i’m not any funnier than the average standup comedian who never makes big, but i’m funnier than most people. the magic that few people can draw well and write jokes. it’s the combination the two that makes what rare. and when you add business background, suddenly had topic that few cartoonists could hope understand without living it.', 'we can see the power atypical combinations when look back the most influential papers throughout the history science. researcher brian uzzi, professor the northwestern university kellogg school management, analyzed more than million scientific papers going back hundreds years and found that the most impactful papers often have teams with atypical combinations backgrounds. another comprehensive study performed uzzi, compared the results academic papers the number citations they received and the other papers they cited. fascinating pattern emerged. the top performing studies cited atypical combinations other studies (90 percent conventional citations from their own field and percent from other fields).', 'want learn new, valuable skill add your toolbox? it’s never been easier:', 'my favorite example high-quality, easy-to-access knowledge 12-year-old girl named adilyn malcolm, who learned how dubstep dance matter months constantly watching short clips others online, practicing, and repeating until she mastered each segment and could perform entire dance flawlessly.', 'imagine adilyn trying learn how dubstep before youtube. there probably wouldn’t have been local dance studio that specialized dubstep. one did, the teacher likely would not have been world-class. next, adilyn wouldn’t have been able obsessively spend hours learning about it. any dubstep videos did exist, she would’ve had convince her parents spend $20 piece them. youtube, the other hand, provided adilyn with chance learn from many world-class teachers and performers cost and her own schedule. today, search youtube for “learn dubstep” returns over million results!', 'and that’s not impressive enough, consider 13-year-old michael sayman. taught himself how code via google. one his mobile games became one the top 100 apps the world, beating out starbucks and yelp. watch 11-year-old amira willighagen masterfully sing opera after teaching herself with youtube videos for four years. something big happening here, and these young prodigies are the harbingers it.', 'as isaac newton famously proclaimed, “if have seen further standing the shoulders giants.” today’s era, have more shoulders stand than ever.', 'while the explosion knowledge making impossible least more difficult for anyone know everything, has also made easier find one big, atypical combination fields skills. it’s easier than ever polymath.', 'here’s why:', 'first, one the main ways that new skill sets, industries, and fields emerge combining them with old ones:', 'second, the number new academic fields and business industries increasing exponentially.', 'and finally, the number new skills increases, the number possible combinations increases exponentially. every new chunk knowledge can theoretically combined with every other knowledge chunk. every new breakthrough creates the potential for exponentially more breakthroughs.', 'if you have one building block (a), you can only make one combination (a). you have two b), then you can make three combinations (a, a+b). once you get four building blocks, you get possible combinations, and the numbers grow dramatically from there. now consider that there are thousands and thousands disciplines, industries, and skills. each new one creates the potential for tens thousands more.', 'below are few the many thousands fields that were created very recently through combination:', 'bottom line: when was high school, remember reading how young leonardo vinci was frustrated that was born period where everything worth being discovered had already been discovered. this quote stuck with me, because was written one the greatest inventors human history. it’s helpful for remember vinci’s quote, because it’s just true today. almost all the potential discovery that humanity will the future.', '“it not the strongest the most intelligent who will survive but those who can best manage change.” -charles darwin', 'what the following six professions have common?', 'answer: none them existed years ago. imagine the power you’d have you could back time, master these skills, and then one the best the world them when they hit big? actually don’t have guess. you’d stand good chance being millionaire. the headline below shows just how valuable driverless car engineer is.', 'so what skills are going valuable years? you know?', 'no? neither neither does anybody.', 'so the question arises, how make investments knowledge now that will pay off far into the future?', 'i’d make the case that polymath much better positioned than specialist. polymath can take the skills that she has learned and combine them new ways quickly master new fields. the other hand, specialist whose fields becomes obsolete would likely take much more time adapt the change and have start back the beginning.', 'in environment accelerating change, we’re going have become polymaths survive. we’re going have dozen careers. each one going require new skills.', 'many the largest problems that face society and individuals benefit from solutions that integrate multiple disciplines.', 'let’s take obesity example. the chart below shows, diet and obesity account for four out the top fifteen causes death the united states. millions deaths that are completely preventable.', 'from the outside, you could easily say that solving the obesity crisis easy problem. just eat less and exercise more. right? not quite.', 'the chart below from the diversity bonus book researcher scott page shows portion just how complex the obesity epidemic is. you can see, many different fields are needed solve this problem: exercise physiology, genetics, behavioral psychology, sociology, economics, marketing, general psychology, education system, nutrition.', 'one the most fundamental mental models from economics supply and demand (see more valuable mental models). it’s relevant the job market, goods and services, the world ideas, and many other places.', 'in this model, there are two ways increase how much price premium you command:', 'you can have the most valuable skill set the world, but everyone also has that skill set, then you’re commodity. becoming polymath and developing unique skill set that few others have, then you’ll able differentiate yourself and charge more.', 'want quick test see you have rare and valuable knowledge? then ask yourself the same question that self-made billionaire peter thiel, one the top investors silicon valley, asks candidates might hire and founders might fund, “what’s the one thing you believe true that one else agrees with you on?” this simple question very quickly tells you whether not you have rare and valuable ideas. you can’t come with anything, tells you that you might not original thinker thought you were.', 'this mental model widely shared among the world’s top investors and performers the following quotes demonstrate:', '“you want greedy when others are fearful. you want fearful when others are greedy. it’s that simple.” warren buffett, founder berkshire hathaway', '“in order get into the top the performance distribution, you have escape from the crowd.” howard marks, founder oaktree capital ($2+ billion net worth)', '“you can’t make money agreeing with the consensus view.” ray dalio, founder bridgewater associates (largest hedge fund the world)', '“the best projects are likely overlooked, not trumpeted crowd; the best problems work are often the ones nobody else even tries solve.” peter thiel, founder paypal and billionaire investor ($3.3 billion net worth)', '“you have odd number 1.” -dr. seuss', 'the weakness art its dogma. and when i’m competing against individual from different discipline, try find the dogma that discipline. when i’m competing with someone within discipline, try find their personal dogma. josh waitzkin, chess grandmaster world tai chi champion', 'being polymath will the new normal, and polymaths who synthesize diverse skills create breakthrough innovations and solve complex problems will have huge impact. generalists who fail synthesize their knowledge into value for others stand flounder their career, perhaps having impressive encyclopedic knowledge, but real impact.', 'meanwhile, specialists risk getting trapped their success. they build narrow skill set and reputation and become highly paid for it. but their careers are fragile. their professions disappear evolve, becomes almost impossible switch without having start over.', 'polymaths, the other hand, are what nassim taleb calls “anti-fragile.” changes the environment make them stronger. new paradigms business emerge their passions grow, they can quickly combine their existing skill sets myriad ways.', 'now that you see how important become modern polymath, the next logical question is: how?', created resource help you with just that…', '“the greatest scientists are artists well.” einstein', 'the idea becoming modern polymath can overwhelming. where you start? what field you learn first? how you find the time? how you translate what you learn into real world value?”', 'when first started learning across fields, stumbled. remember, for example, picking textbook biology, which hadn’t studied since high school, and trying apply life. was slow and not that useful. other words, picked the wrong discipline (for me) start with, and used the wrong method learn it. after lot trial and error, learned techniques that make going across fields faster and easier', 'during the hundreds hours i’ve spent researching how polymath and interviewing polymaths, one key that i’ve discovered mental models.', 'first, mental models transcend disciplines. they are the invisible links that connect disciplines together:', 'for example, once you learn the “80/20 rule,” which states that, many domains, percent your efforts produce percent your results, you can use this mental model improve efficiency and impact every area your life well every field you study forever. you can identify the 20% relationships that cause 80% your feeling connection. you can identify the 20% clients that create 80% your business. you can identify the 20% tasks that create 80% your productivity. and on!', 'furthermore, mental models help you learn multiple skills much more quickly, because they gave your stable base useful and universal knowledge that you can use for the rest your life. therefore, when you into any new discipline, even though you may not have direct experience with that field, you’ll quickly notice mental models you can use.', 'in short, mental models are key becoming better polymath.', 'in our mental model the month club, delve into different mental model every month that will help you become polymath. also show you how combine those models make better decisions and have creative breakthroughs. joining, you immediately receive our best mastery manual.', 'access our best mastery manual the next few minutes >>', 'if you’re just learning about mental models for the first time, free email course will help you get started. team and have spent dozens hours creating it. inside, you’ll learn the models that these billionaires use make business and investing decisions tools you can apply immediately your life and business. you’ll also learn how naturally use these models your everyday life.', 'sign for the free mini-course here >>', *', 'special thanks partner the mental model the month club, eben pagan, for sharing dozens conversations this topic over the past two years. many the ideas this article are result those conversations.', *', 'this article part series articles learning how learn that i’ve written over the past two years. becoming polymath just one many approaches learning faster and more effectively which share. you can watch webinar that summarizes some the biggest principles following the link below...', 'sign for the free learning how learn webinar here >>', 'this article was written with love and care using the blockbuster mental model.']
stion has fascinated entire adult life: what causes some people become world-class leaders, performers, and changemakers, while most others plateau?', 'i’ve explored the answer this question reading thousands biographies, academic studies, and books across dozens disciplines. over time, i’ve noticed deeper practice top performers, one counterintuitive that it’s often overlooked.', 'despite having way more responsibility than anyone else, top performers the business world often find time step away from their urgent work, slow down, and invest activities that have long-term payoff greater knowledge, creativity, and energy. result, they may achieve less day first, but drastically more over the course their lives.', call this compound time because, like compound interest, small investment now yields surprisingly large returns over time.', 'warren buffett, for example, despite owning companies with hundreds thousands employees, isn’t busy you are. his own estimate, has spent percent his career reading and thinking.', 'at the 2016 daily journal annual meeting, charlie munger, buffett’s 40-year business partner, shared that the only scheduled item his calendar one week was getting his haircut and that most his weeks were similar. this the opposite most people who are overwhelmed with short-term deadlines, meetings, and minutiae.', 'ben franklin once wisely said: “an investment knowledge pays the best interest.” perhaps the source buffett’s true wealth not just the compounding his money, but the compounding his knowledge, which has allowed him make better decisions. billionaire entrepreneur, investor, and philanthropist paul tudor jones has eloquently said, “intellectual capital will always trump financial capital.”', 'to build your own intellectual capital, here are six compound time activities that you can start incorporating into your life immediately:', 'many top performers beyond open-ended reflection: they often combine specific prompts with physical journal.', 'each morning, benjamin franklin asked himself, “what good shall this day?” and each evening, “what good have done today?” steve jobs stood the mirror each day and asked, “if today were the last day life, would want what about do?” both billionaire jean paul dejoria and media maven arianna huffington take few minutes each morning count their blessings. oprah winfrey does the same: she starts each day with her gratitude journal, noting five things for which she’s thankful.', 'billionaire entrepreneur and investor reid hoffman asks himself questions about his thinking before bed: what are the kind key things that might constraints solution, might the attributes solution? what are the tools assets might have? what are the key things that want think about? what want solve creatively? grandmaster chess player and world champion martial artist josh waitzkin has similar process, “my journaling system based around studying complexity. reducing the complexity down what the most important question. sleeping it, and then waking the morning first thing and pre-input brainstorming it. i’m feeding unconscious material work on, releasing completely, and then opening mind and riffing it.”', 'whenever legendary management consultant peter drucker made decision, wrote down what expected happen; several months later, he’d compare the results with his expectations. leonardo vinci filled tens thousands pages with sketches and musings his art, inventions, observations, and ideas. albert einstein amassed more than 80,000 pages notes his lifetime. former president john adams kept over journals throughout his life.', 'ever notice that after writing about your thoughts, plans, and experiences, you feel clearer and more focused? researchers call this “writing learn.” helps bring order and meaning our experiences and becomes potent tool for knowledge and discovery. also augments our ability think about complex topics that have dozens interrelated parts, while our brain, itself, can only manage three any given moment. review hundreds studies writing learn showed that also helps with what’s called metacognitive thinking, which our awareness our own thoughts. metacognition key element performance.', 'pulling from the results more than decade experiments, nap researcher sara mednick the university california, san diego, boldly states: “with naps hour hour and half… you get close the same benefits learning consolidation that you would from full eight hour night’s sleep.” people who study the morning about 30% better evening test they’ve had hour-long nap than they haven’t.', 'albert einstein broke his day returning home from his princeton office 1:30 p.m., having lunch, taking nap, and then waking with cup tea start the afternoon. thomas edison napped for three hours per day. winston churchill considered his late afternoon nap non-negotiable. john kennedy ate his lunch bed before drawing the curtains for one- two-hour nap. others who swore daily naps include leonardo vinci (up dozen 10-minute naps day), napoleon bonaparte (before battles), ronald reagan (every afternoon), lyndon johnson (30 minutes day), john rockefeller (every day after lunch), margaret thatcher (one hour day), arnold schwarzenegger (every afternoon), and bill clinton (15–60 minutes day).', 'modern science confirms that napping makes not only more productive, but also more creative. maybe that’s why greats such salvador dali, chess grandmaster josh waitzkin, and edgar allen poe used naps induce hypnagogia, state awareness between sleep and wakefulness that helped them access deeper level creativity.', 'top performers also build exercise into their daily routine. the most common form walking.', 'charles darwin went two walks daily: one noon and one p.m. after midday meal, beethoven embarked long, vigorous walk, carrying pencil and sheets music paper record chance musical thoughts. charles dickens walked dozen miles day and found writing mentally agitating that once wrote, “if couldn’t walk fast and far, should just explode and perish.” philosopher friedrich nietzsche concluded, “it only ideas gained from walking that have any worth.”', 'others who made habit walking include gandhi (took long walk every day), jack dorsey (takes five-mile walk each morning), steve jobs (took long walk when had serious talk), tory burch (45 minutes day), howard schultz (walks every morning), aristotle (gave lectures while walking), neurologist and author oliver sacks (walked after lunch), and winston churchill (walked every morning upon waking).', 'now have scientific data proving what these geniuses intuited: taking walk refreshes the mind and body, and increases creativity. can even extend your life.', 'here’s amazing truth: matter our circumstances, all have equal access the favorite learning medium bill gates, the richest person the world: books.', 'top performers all areas take advantage this high-powered, low-cost way learn.', 'winston churchill spent several hours day reading biographies, history, philosophy, and economics. likewise, the list u.s. presidents who loved books long: george washington, thomas jefferson, abraham lincoln, and jfk were all voracious readers. theodore roosevelt read one book day when busy, and two three day when had free evening.', 'other lumineer readers include billionaire entrepreneur mark cuban (three-plus hours day), billionaire entrepreneur arthur blank (two-plus hours day), billionaire investor david rubenstein (six books week), billionaire entrepreneur dan gilbert (one two hours day), oprah winfrey (credits reading for much her success), elon musk (read two books day when was younger), mark zuckerberg book every two weeks), jeff bezos (read hundreds science fiction novels the time was 13), and ceo disney bob iger (gets every morning 4:30 a.m. read).', 'reading books improves memory, increases empathy, and de-stresses us, all which can help achieve our goals. books compress lifetime’s worth someone’s most impactful knowledge into format that demands just few hours our time. they provide the ultimate roi.', 'interested reading more? recorded webinar help you find the time read and double your return learning.', 'in powers two: finding the essence innovation creative pairs, author and essayist joshua shenk makes the case that the foundation creativity social, not individual. the book reviews the academic research innovation, highlighting creative duos from john lennon and paul mccartney marie and pierre curie steve jobs and steve wozniak.', 'during long daily walks, psychologists daniel kahneman and amos tversky developed new theory behavioral economics that won kahneman the nobel prize. j.r.r. tolkien and c.s. lewis shared their work with each other and set aside mondays meet pub. francis crick and james watson, the co-discoverers the structure dna, batted ideas back and forth relentlessly, both their shared office and during daily lunches cambridge. crick recalled that presented flawed idea, “watson would tell uncertain terms this was nonsense, and vice-versa.” artists andy warhol and pat hackett took two hours each morning “do the diary” together: recounting the previous day’s activities detail.', 'many greats made habit conversing large, ritualized groups. theodore roosevelt’s “tennis cabinet” included friends and diplomats who exercised together daily and debated the issues facing the country. benjamin franklin created “mutual improvement society” called the junto that gathered each friday evening learn from each other. the vagabonds were group four famous friends henry ford, thomas edison, harvey firestone, and john burroughs who took road trips each summer: camping, climbing, and “sitting around the campfire discussing their various scientific and business ventures and debating the pressing issues the day.”', 'there’s reason that jeff bezos says, “our success amazon function how many experiments per year, per month, per week, per day…”', 'one big winner pays for all the losing experiments. recent sec filing, explains why:', '“given ten percent chance 100 times payoff, you should take that bet every time. but you’re still going wrong nine times out ten. all know that you swing for the fences, you’re going strike out lot, but you’re also going hit some home runs. the difference between baseball and business, however, that baseball has truncated outcome distribution. when you swing, matter how well you connect with the ball, the most runs you can get four. business, every once awhile, when you step the plate, you can score 1,000 runs.”', 'no matter how much you read and discuss, you’re still going have spend some time making your own mistakes. that discourages you, just remember thomas edison. took him more than 50,000 botched experiments invent the alkaline storage cell battery, and 9,000 perfect the light bulb. but his death, held nearly 1,100 u.s. patents.', 'experiments don’t just happen the “real” world. our brain has incredible ability simulate reality and explore possibilities much faster rate and lower cost. einstein used thought experiments (imagining himself chasing light beam through space, for instance) help construct breakthrough scientific theories; you can use them set your imagination free slightly smaller conundrums. the journals thomas edison, leonardo vinci, and other luminaries aren’t just filled with writing, they’re also filled with sketches and mind maps.', 'standup comedy far cry from inventing, but experimentation just key the arts science. take star comedian like chris rock, for instance. rock prepares for huge shows venues such madison square garden piecing his routine together small clubs for months end, trying out new material and getting instant feedback from audiences (they either laugh they don’t).', 'others use experiments force them take new habits break unhealthy ones. iconic producer and writer shonda rhimes decided take her workaholism and extreme introversion and say yes everything that scared her experiment she called the year yes. jia jang confronted the universal fear rejection with his 100 days rejection project, which then catalogued youtube. college grad megan gebhart spent the first year her career taking one person week out for coffee; she compiled the lessons she learned book called cups coffee. filmmaker sheena matheiken wore the same black dress every day for year exercise sustainability.', 'as ralph waldo emerson said, “all life experiment. the more experiments you make, the better.”', 'interested jumping right into becoming deliberate experimenter? after studying how dozens the world’s most prolific experimenters have created experimentation engines, spent dozens hours creating free mini-course that includes five email lessons and webinar help you successful with the 10,000-experiment rule. click here sign for the mini-course.', 'in world where everyone speeding and cramming their schedule get ahead, the modern knowledge worker should the opposite: slow down, work less, learn more, and think long-term.', 'in world where frantic work the focus, top performers should focus deliberately learning and rest. world where artificial intelligence automating more and more our work, should unleash our creativity. creativity not unleashed working more, but working less.', 'it’s easy say yourself, “sure! warren buffett can because… well…. he’s warren buffett.” but don’t forget that warren buffett has had his learning ritual for his entire career, way before was the warren buffett know today. could have easily fallen into the trap the constant “busy-ness,” but instead, made three crucial decisions:', 'this lifestyle may not happen for you overnight, but order leverage compound time, you first need believe that lifestyle where you work less but accomplish more possible and beneficial; that lifestyle where you ruthlessly focus your strengths and passions not only feasible, but necessary.', 'to get started, follow the 5-hour rule: for hour day, invest compound time: take that nap, enjoy that walk, read that book, have that conversation. you may doubt yourself, feel guilty even worry you’re “wasting” time… you’re not! step away from your to-do list, just for hour, and invest your future. this approach has worked for some the world’s greatest minds. can work for you, too.', 'this article was written with love and care using the blockbuster mental model.']
define success lot different ways.', 'some think it’s certain amount money. others define way living, level freedom. the truth is, you can define success hundred different ways the only thing that matters whether not you’ve met the expectation you have for yourself.', 'if you ask most people what they want out life, however, almost everyone will say, some way, that they want “successful.” they want the big promotion, the fancy car, the house the hill, the powerful network, the list goes on. unfortunately, because “success” subjective aim, very few people have any sort actionable plan even idea how they’re going achieve the success they want badly. they believe, they say think about enough, success will just “happen.”', 'except doesn’t work like that.', 'here are the things you should start doing your 20s guarantee you’ll successful matter what.', 'the sooner you get started, the better.', 'life only gets busier.', 'too often, people say the phrase, will once i’m bit further along.” but then they get bit further along, and nothing changes. they just keep saying, “i’ll when i’m older. later, when have more time.”', 'but this dangerous cycle. take minutes, per day, and start practicing the habit working your emotional health now.', 'you don’t learn much spending time around people who are exactly where you are.', 'you learn surrounding yourself with people who are further along, who have been where you are and have moved the next level. you’re your 20s, then you want spend time with people their late 30s, 40s, 50s and above. they’re the ones with the answers not your friend who and still trying figure things out for him herself.', 'investments benefit most from the variable time.', 'the sooner you can get started saving and investing, the more dramatic your gains will over the long term. business insider published great piece this about how much more money you’d have for retirement you started saving when you were opposed 35.', 'the difference massive.', 'second, financial freedom doesn’t come from buying new sneakers mimosas during brunch. financial freedom starts happen when money becomes tool for you use make more money. has work for you not the other way around. and the sooner you start practicing that skill, the faster you’ll get place where you’re financially secure.', 'this might sound harsh, but it’s true: you are direct reflection the people around you.', 'at certain point, it’s important realize where people are headed life, and how much time you want continue investing those relationships. you don’t have mean about it, stop talking long-time friends entirely. but you also shouldn’t keep spending two nights per week getting beers with your buddy who entirely comfortable his cubicle job that’s not the sort life you want for yourself.', 'friendships are investments.', 'invest wisely.', 'so many people stop reading their 20s.', 'we live the age netflix shows and podcasts, youtube series’ and igtv interviews. but the truth is, reading completely different experience. slows you down. forces you think deeply. it’s also one the only forms knowledge transfer that allows receive insights from those who came decades, even centuries, before us.', 'the smartest people read and you should too.', 'success almost always rooted some form physical exercise. even the chess titan, bobby fischer, swore his exercise routine stay shape and focused for upcoming matches.', 'when we’re young, tend only associate physical exercise with “sports.” but get older, physical exercise becomes one the few ways can maintain relationship with ourselves our gym time our personal time; early-morning run clears your head for the day.', 'instead only associating exercise with “getting fit,” think routine make you better all aspects your life.', 'we all have things love purely for fun.', 'unfortunately, they tend fall the wayside life continues take its course. our hobbies become reprioritized. our careers take over. add family, kids, bills, vacations, etc., and next thing you know, has been ten years since you picked the guitar wrote your journal.', 'but our hobbies are what keep grounded. they help remember not take life too seriously, and always make time enjoy the journey.', 'everyone their 20s obsessed with becoming successful soon possible.', 'and while this sort hunger succeed great, should never cause you make short-sighted decisions. for example, what’s more valuable: pitching your services for $1,000 but being treated vendor? performing your service for free but getting work directly with the person you want learn from the most?', lot people would disagree with this sort mentality, and yet it’s one the greatest “success” shortcuts the planet. the more you can give short-term rewards, and invest yourself, the slower things might the beginning but the higher your ceiling will ultimately become.', used think you could only become successful (in your 20s) you were 100% dedicated, obsessed with making progress, and, well, single.', 'there are lot entrepreneurs, especially, who live this sort mentality and even the ones that have relationships will regularly de-prioritize their partner. and even their partner will eventually say, “he always says has work, and there’s time for me.”', 'but this flawed approach both business and life.', 'i’ve come learn (through own relationship) that having someone share the journey with, emotionally support you along the way, isn’t going hold you back. anything, life partner will make you better which means it’s your responsibility help nurture that relationship along the way.']
mfortable but powerful truth that took most 20’s internalize: there’s opportunity cost everything worthwhile life. matter what you’re trying accomplish, you’ll have give something order make happen.', 'when asked people facebook what they had given get something else they wanted, got about answers.', 'even you get what you want more than anything the world, you will have give something up. you want live exceptional and extraordinary life, you have give many the things that are part normal one.', 'in building career author, speaker, and host the unmistakable creative podcast, i’ve had give many things along the way.', 'when was college, there was unanimously agreed upon definition what success looked like. while wasn’t explicitly stated, was implied through people’s conversations, behaviors, and decisions.', 'most friends who went berkeley did one the following:', 'this was the implicitly agreed definition success. needless say, these people were all smart, ambitious and highly motivated.', 'by this definition, was complete failure. had prestigious jobs, ivy league mba, and bank balance that was close zero upon graduating from pepperdine 2009. years old, was basically starting from scratch.', 'at some point, realized that had give other people’s definition success. this one the most difficult things give because deeply embedded our cultural narratives that becomes the standard which measure our lives. even entrepreneurs have collectively agreed that fame and fortune are the markers success.', 'but, giving other people’s definition success incredibly liberating and ultimately leads the fullest expression who you are and what matters you. it’s not one-time thing. it’s daily habit comparing less and creating more.', 'other people aren’t going live with the consequences the choices you’ve made. why would you live your life according their definition success?', 'in conversation had with yanik silver few weeks ago, told story about client who wanted become billionaire. when asked why, the client listed number reasons, most which didn’t require billion dollars.', 'by understanding the essence our goals, what that believe our achievements we’ll bring us, it’s easier give other people’s definitions success.', 'there absolutely nothing more likely dampen the prospects becoming rich than nice, fat, regular salary check. felix dennis, how get rich', 'for large amount the last years, income was extremely sporadic. there were plenty months where wondered should just give and get job. there was even year when almost quit. had temporarily give financial security order the work that wanted and have the lifestyle wanted.', 'giving financial security isn’t easy. billionaire shahid khan said “money gives you choices. not having money sucks. you have say many things you want say yes to.', 'but when you’ve been fired from nearly every job you’ve ever had, the safety and security steady paycheck are illusion. gambling the uncertainty entrepreneurial path seemed like better bet than the supposed guarantees that came with steady paycheck. figured building body work would far more valuable than keep adding resume failures.', 'short side note- you struggle with your own body work aren’t sure how start, you’ll love this swipe file i’ve put together. you’ll find best tips honing your productivity creativity, and finding the courage carve your own path, rather than following someone else’s footsteps. get here.', few years ago was telling business partner brian that felt like i’d given the entirety 30’s. spent 30’s doing what many people did their 20’s, building the foundation for career. said, “yeah, but your 40’s are going amazing because what you did your 30’s.” was planting the seeds for the person eventually wanted become.', 'even though was living home, was determined make sure was time well spent. gave myself education that killed the crap out the one got school. read hundreds books, wrote books, planned conference, produced animated series, and interviewed more than 600 people for the unmistakable creative podcast.', 'while all these things didn’t immediately increase earnings, they raised earning potential significantly. i’ve said before, don’t just increase your earnings, increase your earning potential.', 'even had search for job, i’d have far more value offer now than did with previous job experience. you find yourself post-college, living home, struggling find job, give people reason find you interesting.', 'time the most valuable asset your disposal. and you will have give some accomplish anything. you don’t have give your entire 30’s. you give one hour day for uninterrupted creation time, you’ll amazed what you’re capable of.', 'for years, i’d have conversations with family friends and distant relatives about the work that was doing. felt embarrassed the fact that was still living home and not making much money. every time talked one them they would say “so, still blogging?” trying explain that there was far more what was doing felt like lost cause. reminded this conversation that dani shapiro referenced her book still writing:', 'i’ve thought all the times that i’ve been asked i’m still writing. i’ve been asked this acquaintances and strangers, even fans, readers mine….. i’ve asked around and discovered that every artist and writer know contends with version this question. it’s asked writers who are household names. it’s asked photographers whose work hangs the museum modern art. it’s asked stage actors who have won tonys. poets whose work regularly published the finest journals. one who spends her life creating things seems exempt from it.', 'the fear being judged keeps many from taking shot our most ambitious dreams.', 'at certain point, realized wasn’t job convince the people felt judged that what was doing was important, meaningful and valuable. had give fear being judged and the need validated certain people. after all, they weren’t going listening the unmistakable creative podcast reading books. the grand scheme things their judgment approval was essentially meaningless.', 'the people whose opinions did truly value, business partners and really close friends didn’t judge all. they supported and could see light the end the tunnel even the moments that couldn’t.', 'once you give your fear judgment, your ability work changes quite drastically. you become more present, productive, and start gather creative momentum. you focus the process, not the prize, and you start see progress towards the life you want live.', 'we all have past. it’s filled with wonderful experiences, grief, shit, and horrible things:', 'the past something that’s already happened and can never changed. some point, you have give whatever resentment you have towards people, circumstances, and experiences from your past. otherwise, your future starts look awful lot like your past.', 'when you give all that up, you end ditching lot baggage. you walk through the world with sense lightness, peace, and freedom that makes its way into everything else that you do.', 'for years was pissed off about all the bosses who fired me. when finally gave being pissed off, realized these people had given gift, and lit fire under ass. wouldn’t doing what hadn’t been for their firing me.', '“just because someone screwed your past, doesn’t mean you should give them permission screw your future.” zig ziglar', 'giving things isn’t just about sacrifice. it’s also about gain. when you give things you create opening your life for other things. saying everything that’s not aligned with your essential priorities you make space for what is.', 'if you want live life your terms, the long run, you might have give some things the short term. this doesn’t necessarily mean you’re masochist and make your life living hell. just means that you will have sacrifice something that you value less than whatever you ultimately want.', 'you sacrifice comfort and security the present, for uncertainty and greater sense possibility the future.', business partner brian gave salary and steady paycheck one company for commission only sales position another one. his income tripled.', the things mentioned above are just few that i’ve had give over the last years. but giving those things the short run, get live terms the long run. occasion, i’ve made more for hour speaking than did month day job.', one friends gave living california and surfing every day. even though had move maryland, that meant that got see his daughter every day. you can’t really put price something like that.', 'ultimately it’s you define the meaning success and what you’re willing give order have it. there formula. but you will sacrifice. just make sure that emile hirsch said the girl next door, “the juice worth the squeeze.”', 'feeling lost and without purpose? are you perpetually distracted from your real goals? you’ll love the super actionable guides i’ve put together this swipe file.']
read elon musk: tesla, spacex, and the quest for fantastic future over the summer. it’s fantastic read and detailed account the ups and downs one the biggest visionaries our time.', 'it also gives you sneak peek into musk’s work ethic and productivity secrets uses run multiple companies.', 'now, elon musk smarter than average individual and has enormous ambition and drive. but think that us–mere mortals–can incorporate some his productivity secrets into our daily lives.', 'here are the top productivity secrets elon musk and how you can apply them:', 'as the ceo three companies tesla, spacex, and neuralink elon musk has lot things stay top day day basis.', 'that’s why starts his day with his most critical work. for musk, this means dealing with important emails that needs address order unblock other people’s work and progress.', 'he typically starts the day a.m. and replies critical emails for least half hour. musk careful filter anything that not deemed critical, focusing only the most important items.', 'in his own words the usc commencement speech:', '“focus signal over noise. don’t waste time stuff that doesn’t actually make things better.”', 'find your most important task (mit) for the day and tackle first. your mit should the one thing that creates the most impact your work.', 'for example:', 'my most important task writing awesome content. that’s why always start the day sitting down and writing. won’t move the next task before writing least 1000 words.', 'what’s your most important task? use the 80/20 rule help you figure out and get the habit doing before moving anything else.', 'musk has very tight schedule, often working different locations any given day. that’s why he’s constantly trying optimize his time.', 'while admitting hadn’t read any books time management, musk shared some insightful advice how become better:', '“i think it’s very important have feedback loop, where you’re constantly thinking about what you’ve done and how you could doing better. think that’s the single best piece advice: constantly think about how you could doing things better and questioning yourself.”', 'musk incorporates not only his own feedback but also others: urges entrepreneurs seek preferably negative feedback. while might hurtful first, you normally end getting lot more out it.', 'he also focuses hiring the best people any field that can provide consistent and truthful feedback.', 'shortening the feedback loops lead increased efficiency, faster implementation, and better-finished product.', 'the great thing about this particular elon musk productivity secret that works for both your professional and personal life.', 'gather your team and solicit feedback about particular product, feature, management style, business process, anything that you are currently trying improve.', '“don’t tell what you like, tell what you don’t like.”', 'you can the same exercise with friends. and while the negative feedback may wrong, you know they are simply trying help you and it’s well-intentioned.', first principle basic assumption that can’t deduced from any other proposition. it’s the only sure thing complex problem.', 'musk reasons from first principles, rather than analogy (such previous experiences). this way you build your reasoning from the ground up:', '“you look the fundamentals and construct your reasoning from that and then see you have conclusion that works doesn’t work. and may may not different from what people have done the past. it’s harder think that way, though.”', 'here’s example first principles reasoning, from musk himself: “what rocket made of? aerospace-grade aluminum alloys, plus some titanium, copper, and carbon fiber. then asked, what the value those materials the commodity market? turned out that the materials cost rocket was around two percent the typical price.”', 'instead buying rocket for millions dollars, musk decided purchase the raw materials for cheap and build the rockets himself his own company.', 'and spacex was born.', 'reasoning from first principles forces you think differently. first principles about getting the root cause the problem. you have break down the problem into its basic elements.', 'there are three main steps apply this thinking framework:', 'if you want deeper look into musk’s mind and reasoning first principles, read one all-time favorite articles: the cook and the chef: musk’s secret sauce.', 'the first productivity hack gave you slight hint for this one: musk prefers communicate his own terms. that means defaulting email and texts, both asynchronous ways communication.', 'in his own words:', '“i love email. wherever possible try communicate asynchronously. i’m really good email.”', 'he also makes himself hard reach for people outside his company using obscure email address.', 'this lets him focus actual work for his companies.', 'progress comes from being focused and performing deep work. this means living asynchronously possible and with minimal interruptions from coworkers.', 'here are three solutions start working your terms (in order difficulty):', 'minimize distractions your daily life order make progress meaningful work.', 'when musk not building rockets revolutionizing the automobile industry, there’s one place you can always find him: email. joked conference: lot email very good email. that’s core competency”.', 'he extremely clear, concise, and direct his emails. example, read the email sent his entire staff about the use acronyms aptly called “acronyms seriously suck”.', 'he frequently emails his entire company with updates, how communicate, company visions and mission, and being more productive work.', '“people work better when they know what the goal and why. important that people look forward coming work the morning and enjoy working.”', 'he also master public speaking, converting complex concepts into easy understand language using authentic voice. musk often uses the present tense when talking about visionary topics, language trick that excites the listener into feeling the future now.', 'according study carleton university, third the workweek the “typical’’ knowledge worker spent email. that’s why mastering communication over email art form.', 'you want succinct but also get your message across. email, every word counts. here are some tips how master communication over email:', 'musk multi-tasks strategically. whenever possible, combines several tasks together productivity hack known batching. for example, answers emails while eating having meeting over lunch.', 'here’s quote from elon the subject:', '“but what find i’m able with [my kids] and still email. can with them and still working the same time… didn’t, wouldn’t able get job done.”', 'another example going through emails and invoices while phone meetings interviews.', 'studies have confirmed that multi-tasking normally less efficient than single-tasking. the brain needs time adjust when navigating different tasks, also known task switching. switching makes you tired and unproductive, not the tasks themselves.', 'but you batch similar tasks that call for similar mindsets you can efficiently work multiple tasks without losing your workflow. other words, your brain focused one type task time.', 'here are couple examples:', 'to find more activities you can stack, write down all your general activities for the day and week and identify the ones that can batched together. try the batch couple times and rearrange tasks necessary.', 'to process batches even faster, use the pomodoro technique.', 'running three companies small feat, which means time the essence for elon musk. constantly trying optimize his time using feedback loops.', 'like many other ultra-productive and successful people, follows very detailed and specific daily schedule. breaks his calendar into five-minute slots and finding your way into one those openings tough work.', 'he prioritizes engineering, design, and manufacturing, spending percent his time work those areas.', '“i don’t spend time pontificating about high-concept things; spend time solving engineering and manufacturing problems.”', 'by splitting his day into 5-minute chunks, musk manages get more tasks scheduled into his work.', 'the most productive people work from their calendar instead to-do list. calendars are finite and give you better sense time, making easier determine how much time you have complete projects during your week.', 'breaking your days into small chunks and scheduling tasks your calendar can boost your productivity. but you don’t have use 5-minute chunks. found that the most efficient way organizing work break the days into 30-minute slots. find timing that works best for you and your work.', 'and make sure that you schedule everything: checking email, calling clients, lunch, and meetings. everything goes your calendar.', 'rip to-do lists and instead work from your calendar.', 'perhaps one musk’s most notorious character traits his tendency set incredibly ambitious deadlines for his companies’ projects. uses stretch goals way change perception:', '“the first step establish that something possible; then probability will occur.”', 'here’s story from former spacex executive: “it’s like has everyone working this car that meant get from los angeles new york one tank gas. they will work the car for year and test all its parts. then, when they set off for new york after that year, all the vice presidents think privately that the car will lucky get las vegas. what ends happening that the car gets new mexico twice far they ever expected and elon still mad. gets twice much anyone else out people.” (emphasis mine)', 'the last sentence illustrates the power stretch goals. even the face failure, your goal was outrageous, impossible achieve, that you celebrate the small achievements you made because you expected that nothing would come out it.', 'the initial plan tesla was start shipping the roadster 2006. the company pushed that deadline back several times until the car actually became available 2008. even though they released its car almost two years after the deadline, tesla delivered the first completely battery-powered electric car.', 'in his own words:', '“i say something, and then usually happens. maybe not schedule, but usually happens.”', 'musk’s stretch goals have given world where one the best cars you can buy electric, and where finally have reusable rockets: “when henry ford made cheap, reliable cars, people said, ‘nah, what’s wrong with horse?’ that was huge bet made, and worked.”', 'setting goals that maintain the status quo doesn’t get you reusable rockets.', 'the intention setting stretch goals push yourself outside the comfort zone. growth doesn’t happen when you keep doing what you’ve already done the past. comes from failing while trying make progress. you aim achieve five great things and only succeed two them, you are outperforming all the people who never tried the first place.', 'stretch goals demand more quantity and quality work and force you innovate more often than ordinary goals. and the pursuit it, you grow your skills where they need order get done.', 'at first, you won’t know how ambitious your stretch goals should be. using trial and error, understand how much past your limits you should push. but the most important thing start trying and then adjust you go.', 'next time you are making plans for work, take few extra minutes include stretch goal. try push yourself perform 50% better than your normal goal requires. big and see you can surprise yourself with incredible performance. using this strategy the first step towards smashing goals and reaching targets you didn’t even think were possible!', 'in 2004, musk called supplier get the price electromechanical actuator. the supplier quoted $120,000.', 'reasoning from first principles, musk broke down the components needed and asked steve davis, now spacex’s director advanced projects, build one from scratch for under $5,000. davis spent nine months designing and building the actuator for $3,900, which flew space inside the falcon rocket.', 'elon musk never satisfied with where now. his companies have had enormous achievements, but musk knows that there’s always room for improvement every area. there’s always better, faster, cheaper way things:', '“you should take the approach that you’re wrong. your goal less wrong.”', 'this what called growth mindset, important skill that separates successful people from everyone else. when you have growth mindset, you know you can learn anything you put enough effort into it. and you fail, you approach the problem from different angle until you find solution that works. you iterate until you get right.', 'in musk’s words:', '“failure option here. things are not failing, you are not innovating enough.”', 'the opposite known fixed mindset, where the status quo rarely challenged. things will always the way they are because “that’s how things around here”. preconceived notions are taken universal truths, instead being questioned. thus, people stagnate.', 'on the other hand, developing growth-oriented mindset brings progress both our personal and professional lives. and even you manage small gains each day are small, they compound over time. gain every day compounds almost 3800% increase over year.', 'growth comes from tackling difficult problems, questions, and challenges. order succeed, you need train the brain look failures and struggles progress, getting closer the solution.', 'here’s how you can start developing growth mindset:', 'according his brother, musk used read books day from early age. other words: devoured knowledge. this led wide understanding many sciences, such physics, math, engineering, and computer science.', 'one favorite quotes about how describes knowledge:', '“it important view knowledge sort semantic tree make sure you understand the fundamental principles, the trunk and big branches, before you get into the leaves/details there nothing for them hang to.”', 'even when running his companies, musk constantly tries learn from the people around him that have more knowledge specific topic. here’s passage from the book: “he would trap engineer the spacex factory and set work grilling him about type valve specialized material. thought first that was challenging see knew stuff,” said kevin brogan, one the early engineers. “then realized was trying learn things. would quiz you until learned ninety percent what you know.”', 'over the years, musk developed t-shaped skills: lot knowledge one particular field and substantial amount knowledge many other disciplines and topics. this allowed him world-class one field (business) but also use his broad knowledge innovate, find different solutions, more creative, and collaborate with experts other fields effectively.', 'let’s start with practical example: you want healthy. order healthy, practicing just one sport isn’t going cut it. you need know whole lot skills: you need learn the basics good diet, how develop muscle, flexibility, different cardio, condition, etc. while you have deep knowledge particular field the sport you also developed broad knowledge many other areas which are the basis being healthy. this the t-shaped skills approach.', 'let’s look someone who works marketing growth: deep knowledge acquisition channels such ppc, seo, and viral loops, while also having broad knowledge over other topics such statistics, some programming, design principles, and copywriting.', 'here’s how you can develop t-shaped skills your area:', 'one the most upvoted questions the 2015 reddit ama with musk was:“what daily habit you believe has the largest positive impact your life?” which musk simply replied: “showering.”', 'in another interview, musk admitted the shower where normally comes with the best ideas: “this sounds really cliche, but like, the shower probably like the most… wake up, shower the morning and think what’s really happened things have percolated the subconscious and it’s not really occurring the shower but you’re kinda getting the results from last night’s you know, computation, basically.” (emphasis mine)', think that’s the lesson productivity from showering: your brain has been working all night for you, trying come with solutions the background. takes few minutes turn “on” and that can happen during the shower, helping you see challenges with more clarity.', 'it also provides you with quiet time think right after refreshing your brain. you can use plan the day ahead think about solutions for problems you might face during the day ahead, for example.', '“i think possible for ordinary people choose extraordinary.”', 'stay blessed, and stay inspired!', 'if you are looking for more productivity hacks, join invite-only community: one new short curated productivity hack your email, twice week get free access!']
farmer had become old and ready pass his farm down one his two sons. when brought his sons together speak about it, told them: the farm will the younger son.', 'the older son was furious! “what are you talking about?!” fumed.', 'the father sat patiently, thinking.', '“okay,” the father said, need you something for me. need more stocks. will you cibi’s farm and see has any cows for sale?”', 'the older son shortly returned and reported, “father, cibi has cows for sale.”', 'the father graciously thanked the older son for his work. then turned the younger son and said, need you something for me. need more stocks. will you cibi’s farm and see has any cows for sale?”', 'the younger son did was asked. short while later, returned and reported, “father, cibi has cows for sale. each cow will cost 2,000 rupees. are thinking about buying more than cows, cibi said would willing reduce the price 100 rupees. cibi also said they are getting special jersey cows next week aren’t hurry, may good wait. however, need the cows urgently, cibi said could deliver the cows tomorrow.”', 'the father graciously thanked the younger son for his work. then turned the older son and said, “that’s why your younger brother getting the farm.”', 'most people only what they are asked, doing only the minimum requirement. they need specific instructions most things they do.', 'conversely, those who become successful are anxiously engaged good cause. they don’t need managed all things. they don’t just the job, they right and complete. they also influence the direction for how certain ideas and projects go.', 'most importantly, those who become successful initiate. they reach out people, ask questions, make recommendations, offer help, and pitch their ideas.', 'being successful requires being proactive and not waiting for life come you. means you’re offense, not defense. you’re active, not passive.', 'in every organization, there are select few employees who would difficult replace. for the most part, most people are like the older son the story. most people could easily replaced. most people are passive and reactive. they require specific instructions. they need governed and managed all things.', 'initiation always involves some degree risk. you’re putting yourself out there and there chance you could fail.', 'conversely, doing only what you’re told entails risk and carries responsibility. it’s playing safe.', 'are you initiator? you absolutely can be.', 'but not, one thing for certain: life isn’t going wait for you.']
lly posted quora nicolas cole.', obsessive.', 'pull the covers off leg the same way every morning, with one familiar swoop that drags over bare legs. stand and move right foot and then left foot never left foot and then right toward the bathroom. when brush teeth, begin the top right molar and move and down each tooth until arriving left molar. then repeat the sequence the bottom, this time from the left side the right. the shower, grab for the bar soap and follow simple pattern: three long scrubs and down left arm, three long scrubs and down right, three circles chest, three more circles farther down, and on. when leave the shower, it’s dry towel the head, right ear, left ear, left armpit, right armpit, grab both corners, swoop the spine, back-and-forth motion with enough friction start fire, quick shake down both legs, and then clothing ritual begins.', 'when was very young, had habit touching the edge every counter, wall, desk, table, chair, any flat surface with the tops knuckles.', 'the sensation reassured me.', '“ma’am, believe your child may have add, along with aspects obsessive compulsive disorder.” said handful worried doctors present adolescence.', 'the world not organized you think.', 'we set goals without first auditing our current commitments. visualize ourselves new job without studying the paths that lead there. talk about personal changes want make without addressing what obstacles may prevent those changes from happening. make promises without having tested our own commitment. call “nothin’ but net” our future, our next goal, without first even bothering ask, “do know how shoot basketball?”', 'the world organized chaos, best. would argue chaos, proudly wearing name tag that says:', 'organization: [awr-guh-nuh-zey-shuh n]', 'noun', 'courtesy dictionary.com', 'it’s hard. that’s why.', 'it’s hard. it’s revealing. it’s obvious proof that you’re not busy you say you are. that you’re not disciplined you thought you were. that you waste time lot time. you don’t know what you really want. you struggle with commitment. you lack perseverance and drive. you distract yourself out fear failure. you don’t actually want what you say you want.', 'you are living lie.', 'but accomplishment? oh, everyone can talk all day about accomplishment:', '“you know what want do? what i’m going do? i’m going start company. big successful company well, might not even big because who knows, maybe want just live the beach and make enough fend for myself, which wouldn’t terrible, i’m still thinking through the specifics. but yeah, i’m going build company maybe should wait, actually, because have lot going right now and mean what grows too fast? don’t want have deal with too much success too early. success like that can change people, you know. i’m very aware that. yeah, don’t want dive too deep just yet, because that would lot handle, all that success. i’ll probably just set smaller goal for now. think want write book.”', 'idiots.', 'every single goal, achievement, award, finished product, deliverable, completed project, accolade, and cooked dinner requires one thing:', 'time.', 'so, before set goal, any goal all, ask myself three things:', 'when was teenager, wanted become professional world warcraft player.', 'yes. was.', parted with sleep. every single night, pretended sleep 10pm, only sneak back computer 10:30pm play world warcraft until 3am.', 'when was years old, became one the highest ranked world warcraft players north america.', 'with this habit-focused process, i…', 'what habit can replicate day after day after day?', 'if you want writer, what needs happen for you write for hours every single day?', 'if you can’t answer that question, you will never become writer.', 'if you want build successful company, what needs happen for you work that startup idea for hours every single day?', 'if you can’t answer that question, you will never become company founder.', 'if you want become bodybuilder, what needs happen for you hit the gym for hours every single day, and eat full meal every 2.5 hours, every single day?', 'if you can’t answer that question, you will never become bodybuilder.', 'people love talk.', 'stop talking about what you’re going achieve.', 'what want know how you’re going make the time practice the very thing you want achieve.', 'not just today.', 'how are you going practice every single day?', 'and here’s what everyone’s response is:', '“i just will, ok?”', 'nah. you won’t.', 'tell what hours. tell exactly what time you’re going sit down, and what time you’re going get again.', 'then tell how you’re going guard that time daily basis.', 'like said, i’m obsessive.']
'to listen this answer while you read, click here: quora: invest yourself nicolas cole', 'the other day, was chatting with friend friend, senior high school who was getting ready off college.', '“i want start life over,” said. want reinvent myself, and prove that you don’t have follow the same path everyone else.”', '“you can that,” said. “but you have willing thing that not very many teenagers and young adults are willing do.”', '“what’s that?” asked.', 'this goes for anyone school, out school, young, old, whatever. you’re either class, you’re work.', 'during those hours, you can learn. you can grow. you can improve certain skills. you can even make money.', 'but anyone who truly makes something themselves sees that time their daily standard. but they not see “the end.” they not get out class, leave work and think, “ah, time sit back, relax, and just chill.”', 'they work side project.', 'they practice their craft.', 'they improve their skills, study, spend time learning from people far more knowledgable.', 'they see the only time they have the things they really want life and they don’t take minute for granted.', 'young people, especially, and the ones who achieve some sort success early age, treat their free time this way. and anyone older, anyone job they don’t enjoy and suddenly want shift their life new direction, they begin treating their “free time” accordingly.', 'people who make moves, and who make difference, invest themselves.', 'so, how you this?', firm believer that order achieve anything life, really something worthwhile, you have have your leading goal. that is, you have prioritize that thing over everything else, the point where you are able practice every single day.', 'how you measure “success” then pretty simple: you either practiced for the day you didn’t.', 'if your leading goal get fit, you either went the gym you didn’t.', 'if your leading goal write book, you either wrote today you didn’t.', 'if your leading goal launch startup, you either worked that startup today you didn’t.', 'investing yourself, and really building yourself (or project) begins with the daily habit actually doing it.', 'we are all reflection who spend time with.', 'spend time with negative people, and you’ll turn negative.', 'spend time with positive people, and you’ll turn positive.', 'it’s just how the law attraction works.', 'similarly, you spend time around people who share the same leading goal you, have leading goal that inspires you work harder toward your own leading goal, you will move and grow 10x faster.', 'this why things like clubs, teams, and even accelerators and incubators are such huge part society. know the value community, and try create communities that help each improve faster rate.', 'when was younger, studied classical piano. was requirement our family for each child play musical instrument, and mother did marvelous job ensuring that practiced each and every day.', 'on the days really didn’t want practice, and would frantically play through songs already knew how play well, mother would walk into the music room and take seat the nearby chair.', '“cole,” she would say, stern voice.', '“what.”', '“you’re not practicing.”', '“yes am. can’t you hear me,” i’d say, banging the keys some more.', '“no, you’re playing. and that’s fine. but doesn’t count toward your hour practice. you need practice something new,” she would say.', didn’t want to. practicing new things was hard. meant fumbling through notes for hours and hours until finally they would stick fingers.', 'but, she was right. just sitting there for hour didn’t mean had practiced much anything.', 'just allocating the time practice only part the battle. the other half comes down what you with that time, and how much you make work for you.', 'thanks for reading! :)', 'if you enjoyed this article, hit that *clap* button below write for you, and would mean lot for others read this well.', 'say hey on', 'quora instagram facebook twitter inc magazine website']
'sometimes wish could gather all the women i’ve ever known, encountered, and conduct this informal poll:', 'raise your hand you’ve ever behaved badly and blamed your period.', 'raise your hand you’ve ever acted helpless the face unpleasant-if-not-physically-demanding task like dealing with wild animal that’s gotten inside the house.', 'raise your hand you’ve ever coerced man into sex even though didn’t seem really want it.', 'raise your hand you’ve thought you were liberty this coercing because men “always want it” and should feel lucky any time they get it.', 'raise your hand you’ve ever threatened harm yourself man breaks with you doesn’t want see you anymore.', 'raise your hand you’ve been physically abusive with male partner, knowing you’d unlikely face any legal consequences.', 'raise your hand you’ve lied about being birth control, faked pregnancy scare, see how man would respond.', 'raise your hand you’ve ever manipulated divorce child custody dispute your favor falsely insinuating that man has been abusive toward you your child.', 'in this hypothetical gathering every woman i’ve ever known encountered (i’m imagining football stadium decent capacity), i’m certain there not single one these questions that, answered honestly, wouldn’t send hands into the air. including own. know i’m guilty the pest control front. don’t want think too hard about some the others.', 'we hear all too much about toxic masculinity, that amorphous term that refers the way traits like aggression and emotional repression are baked into male social norms. also frequently shows online feminism lazy shorthand for registering disapproval just about anything men all. but when are going grant equal rights women and admit that toxic femininity also exists and can just poisonous?', 'there are minor forms feminine toxins, like blaming irrational temper tantrums “being hormonal” feigning helplessness order get what you want. and there are major toxins, many having with weaponizing your fragility that those whom you cause harm have difficult time defending themselves, lest they look like the aggressors. women, course, can unleash these tactics other women, they romantic partners not. but for the sake this discussion, let’s say are talking about women and men and sex. we’ve established that many men are socially conditioned think that women owe them sex. but what about the women that assume that men should grateful for any sex they get?', 'in free society, everyone, regardless gender, free manipulative, narcissistic, emotionally destructive asshole.', 'throughout life, i’ve heard countless men tell stories about going ahead with sex even though they didn’t really want to. sometimes, was because they didn’t want hurt the woman’s feelings. other times, was because they feared being perceived having low sex drive.', remarkable number men have told about times when women approached them and, often wordlessly, initiated sexual encounters without the slightest provocation questions asked. i’ve heard, more than once, about unsolicited hand jobs school buses when they were boys. also, more than once, men have told about past grade school camping trips overnight parties wherein girls they barely knew slipped into their sleeping bags beds. some cases, the men were happy oblige the women’s desires. other cases, though, they went through with the encounters because they didn’t want make awkward situation even more awkward.', 'these stories have been relayed tone can only describe bafflement. the men are not complaining, but nor are they boasting. anything, they seem struggling find the words describe not-entirely-welcome encounter that they felt they had right regard with anything other than gratitude. needless say, you imagined any these situations with the genders reversed, you’d have the potential for very different framing.', realize that the physical size difference between most women and most men means that the above comparison isn’t entirely fair; woman who’s sexually aggressive with man probably not putting him insurmountable physical danger. and i’m cognizant the fact that for every bad behavior mentioned opening list questions there equal, opposite, and potentially more physically threatening form bad behavior that men can, and do, visit upon women with just much frequency.', 'but that, right there, precisely point. free society, everyone, regardless gender, any other identification, free manipulative, narcissistic, emotionally destructive asshole. i’m not sure why men have been getting all the credit lately.', 'the #believewomen memes that have arisen the wake #metoo general, and the brett kavanaugh saga particular, are coming from place empathy and good intentions. but they’re also stripping women our complications and contradictions, and therefore our humanity.', 'for what it’s worth, believed christine blasey ford’s testimony about what happened between her and kavanaugh when they were high school. personal belief, based nothing more than gut feeling, that things transpired more less ford described them and that kavanaugh was too drunk the time remember. believe that kavanaugh effectively lied under oath about the extent his drinking, and that this alone should have disqualified him from holding seat the supreme court.', 'but there difference between believing and knowing. even the judiciary committee had done the right thing and subpoenaed mark judge, who witnessed the encounter between ford and kavanaugh, and forced him testify under oath, one would ever have known definitively what happened that evening. all the truth digging the world will not change the fact that all kinds people misrepresent, misremember, misinterpret, and willfully unwillfully make misleading statements for all kinds reasons.', 'and that why #believewomen, with its suggestion that women are some monolithic entity that inherently more moral, innocent, trustworthy than men, not just reductive but insulting. women are not simple, guileless creatures whom only the most innocent motives should ever ascribed. both sexes contain multitudes. or, george carlin put it, “men are from earth, women are from earth. deal with it.”', '#metoo important. #believewomen hollow sloganeering.', 'my opening list “raise your hand” questions surely set some teeth edge. it’s difficult talk about things like women tricking men into getting them pregnant, not least all because makes you sound like part the men’s rights movement loosely knit and often self-defeating enterprise that overrides legitimate grievances about, say, the family court system, with ambient misogyny and conspiracy theories. when was twenties, just hearing phrase like “tricking men” would have made assume was coming from woman-hating kook.', 'but the thing about growing older that over the years, you run into more and more people and see all the different kinds havoc they can wreak. know men who, amid contentious divorce proceedings, have been accused, preposterously, spousal and child abuse. know women who are skilled the dark art gaslighting that the targets their mind games, boyfriends bffs, don’t stand chance. once, while working with high school students, overheard some girls joking one another about how they were going out that night and “hit older guys who don’t know we’re underage and later like ‘dude, you’re pedophile.’”', decided give the girls the benefit the doubt and assume they were just goofing around, condemning misogynist stereotypes about young women jailbait ironically reclaiming those stereotypes. along the way, tried think like good feminist and consider that patriarchal societies foster even force this kind manipulative female behavior because it’s often the only power available women.', 'but that’s excuse and poor one. some women act abominably because some people act abominably.', 'the famous line “feminism the radical notion that women are people” has been popping bumper stickers and t-shirts since the 1980s. but 2018, many feminists seem illogically invested the idea that women operate under different set standards and practices than men and might, fact, something rather separate from “people.” they will say this because women are still often reduced second-class citizens; underpaid the labor force, underrepresented politics, and undermined and ignored when, like ford, they speak about their experiences.', 'but can please put this into some perspective? there now entire literary genre and, more than that, vast quarters the mainstream media devoted women speaking about their experiences. every day, the stories roll across news feeds faster than could possibly read them, their headlines tweaked clickbait perfection. “thanks for not raping us, all you ‘good men.’ but it’s not enough,” went the headline washington post guest opinion column earlier this month.', 'meanwhile, when men speak about what it’s like accused sexual misconduct just navigate the sexual arena general the only culturally sanctioned response paint them entitled whiners best and narcissistic and, course, toxic sociopaths worst.', '#metoo important. #believewomen hollow sloganeering that will ultimately set back rather than move forward. like all movements, #metoo will live die the degree which it’s willing let people in. until makes room for examinations not just toxic masculinity but also toxic femininity—and, even better, dispatch with these meaningless terms—it will continue tell only half the story. until admits that women can manipulative and creepy and generally awful men, the movement will continue send message that we’re not really whole people. and why would anyone believe someone like that?']
'louis has just released statement the sexual misconduct accusations that have been levelled him various women, and goes pretty much exactly you’d expect you’re familiar with his work. changes things from the standard stock response powerful men generally provide these situations, says that the stories are true, explains why what did was wrong, then launches into his “gosh i’m such awful person” lovable loser schtick that his fans have already come adore.', 'this came out maybe hour before this writing, and quick glance social media feeds says that some are buying and some are selling. for the time being he’s avoided total destruction his career. i’m sure will make good standup set someday. oh, that louie! just can’t get right, but he’s meta and self-aware about it!', 'whatever.', was years old the first time was raped. the last time, was 39. not unusual. i’ve been involved private ongoing discussion with some dear friends since last year which all share our rape stories with one another, and despite deep awareness rape culture’s ubiquitousness even was surprised how universal these experiences are among the women know.', 'all women. rape culture impacts all women. severely. the only reason this treated less epidemic than because there are longstanding mechanisms built into our society (shame, religion, power dynamics, cultural taboo against shaming men for irresponsible use their sexuality, etc.) keep from speaking out about them.', 'these mechanisms are now falling apart.', 'medium.com', 'human civilization made rape. for millennia, all over the world, women have been commodified and kept property for the purpose receiving male reproductive fluids and raising their progeny, regardless our will. during this time were kept home while men invented religion, money, economics, war, government, hierarchy, class, culture, rules, laws and traditions, including the laws the marital bed. civilization has been arranged that each man receives woman own, with whom may have sex whenever wishes, between building, fighting, destroying and conquering accordance with the will whatever ruler happened running the show the time.', 'this only just now beginning change. woman’s will for her own sexuality only just now becoming culturally relevant, blink eye from historical perspective.', 'spousal rape was not considered crime all states until 1993, and there are still seven states where there marital exception certain sex crimes. the full anatomy the clitoris wasn’t recognized western science until 1998. the g-spot was given its name the 1980s after male gynecologist, ernst gräfenberg, who spent time the 1940s studying the stimulation the urethra. birth control pills kill sexual desire. third women reported pain their last sexual experience. there little-known, virtually unresearched and untreatable condition called vulvodynia that causes such intense nerve pain that some women consider suicide, and more common than breast cancer.', 'just sit with that. third women reported pain their last sexual experience. they didn’t just not enjoy it, they gritted their teeth through it. why? because for myriad reasons, don’t feel like have choice. that’s rape culture.', 'given that interest woman’s will for her own sexuality just barely beginning enter social consciousness large scale, shouldn’t surprise anyone that only just now 2017 that sharing our experiences with rape culture beginning mainstream.', 'rape dynamics are woven into the fabric society far more pervasively than anyone realizes, and pulling this thread, the whole mad tapestry will necessarily unravel. this can only good thing.', 'medium.com', 'our species crossroads. it’s become self-evident that we’re about either collectively experience some kind enormous transformation, the way the dinosaur. parallel our unprecedented ability network and share information and ideas with our fellow humans all around the globe death march toward either ecosystemic disaster nuclear holocaust which far shows signs slowing down, and one these two factors will necessarily win out some point the near future. thus far our attempts shift trajectories have failed spectacularly. something going save us, it’s going come from way out left field.', 'women everywhere feel the significance the #metoo phenomenon. lot are scared say anything about for fear hurting the feelings the men love, fear retribution, and fear being eaten alive the intimidating, debate-culture defenders patriarchy, but there’s widespread sense that this thing much bigger than seems. some leaders conventional feminist thought have been speculating about some kind progressive political upheaval, but opinion this infinitely more revolutionary than that. are about experience plunge into completely unknown and uncharted territory.', can’t even keep track all the men who are facing sexual misconduct accusations anymore women gain more and more confidence call out, but the hyper-politicized nature the circles move tells it’s entirely bipartisan. liberal men rape and conservative men rape, all the way the power structure. democrats and republicans are both accusing one another hypocrisy today for focusing one faction’s sex crimes and not the other’s, while ignoring the elephant the room that rape happening all over the place. what will happen when they can’t ignore anymore?', 'what will happen when women begin really reclaiming their sexuality? what will happen when women everywhere flick every light the house, and all the perversions men longer have any darkness left hide in?', 'it unimaginable. power structures will disrupted from the basic family unit all the way the highest echelons influence. movement will happen. cracks will appear. the will women, which spent all those millennia forbidden from influencing the development the civilization which now find ourselves, will finally have some space get word edgewise.', 'most elites remain blissfully unaware what’s coming. the liberal think tanks washington still believe they’ll able manipulate the #metoo phenomenon into some pussyhat-wearing rah rah kamala harris 2020 movement that they can use their advantage. they have never been more wrong. pandora’s box has been opened. they cannot manipulate this.', 'what coming not new political movement, what coming revolution against the very fabric the profoundly sick society that our species has woven for itself. shining bright light rape culture each and every instance rears its ugly head, are actually re-tracing our footsteps back the dawn civilization and undoing every wrong turn that humanity has made which got the catastrophic point now find ourselves. the fact that this becoming mainstream practice means that this societal alchemy will necessarily unfold, regardless people’s old ideas about politics and revolution.', 'when the doors the sexual revolution opened the late sixties, the predators flooded and quickly turned “you can have sex whenever you want!” “you can have sex whenever want.” germaine greer warned the time that thousands years relentlessly abusing our sexuality had made into female eunuchs who had idea what our sexuality was. unfortunately, that’s still mostly true today.', 'we know our sexuality our spark and our spunk, our creativity, our beauty and our healing. know raped woman will lose all these things the months after the rape, often taking years get them back. know that when you scare woman’s sexuality, you dim her light. and that’s louis ck’s greatest crime right now, whether knows not. all those female comics that smeared his smelly sexuality all over? made them less brave, less fearless, less funny.', 'in time when face human extinction, need all the bravery and humor can get.', 'there’s certain type personality that finds deeply offensive that talk about rape culture sometimes. personally found being raped rather offensive, myself. the people who find these discussions triggering are going have find way deal with it, because they’re only going get more common. sexual predation longer shrouded any taboos against pointing and calling what is. complain all you want this upheaval coming either way.', 'this not political ideological revolution. this complete undoing all that sick this world, coming not from our minds but from deep within our cells. voice has finally been given the heritage pain which has been passed from mother daughter from generation generation taught one another how survive world sexual slavery since the dawn civilization. will not pretty when first comes out. will not sexy. will not dance for male sexuality has been trained like good little girl. will roar, and will destroy.', 'change coming. what looks like women talking about their experiences with rape culture actually vast area endarkened human unconsciousness suddenly becoming enlightened into consciousness. whole section our collective consciousness which have never previously had access now suddenly becoming available us. the old structures will not able stand this new ground, they were built upon the old ground.', 'buckle up.', 'medium.com', '______']
'sunday night, like many other women, created #metoo post. instead telling story sexual harassment, showed via two photos from college thesis project, “shooting back” (1986–88), with quick tossed-off line: “#metoo, too many times count. with photographic evidence, even.”', '“shooting back” began exercise self-therapy, after stranger broke into dorm room and then broke me. (i’d also been mugged gunpoint twice, once with friend john, another time alone, well kicked unconscious busy street while walking home from the library, well sexually assaulted group drunk men while walking home from video store. but digress.) the photos “shooting back” were men who’d harassed the street. after they’d say, “hey, baby, wanna get on?” i’d say, “no, thank you, but would like shoot your photo.” had nikkormat with single fixed 28-millimeter lens back then, that’s what used. meaning, this project, had get their faces, super close, and use camera weapon. was small shift the power dynamic, but was own form grace and reclamation, turning hunter into prey.', 'that college thesis that transformation hidden pain into visible art launched career. was published boston magazine, photo, and photomagazine. was nominated for eugene smith award. landed spot one only two females exhibited the first visa pour l’image photojournalism festival perpignan, france. got foot the door the photo agencies and publications that sent israel, then afghanistan and beyond.', 'the two photos posted sunday night were unusual for the series, they were acts sexual harassment caught medias res. one was men wolf masks who’d chased down street downtown boston. and then there was the man boston’s combat zone who’d said, “hey, baby, wanna get on,” and i’d said, “no, thank you, but would like shoot your photo,” but before could approach him with 28-millimeter lens, flashed me. quickly shot the photo from five feet away and ran.', 'an hour after posting these two photos facebook, was informed that i’d been suspended from the social media site for 24-hours for posting “content that threatens promotes sexual violence exploitation.” the admonition went further: “where appropriate,” said, “we refer this content law enforcement.” was hurt, horrified, and, frankly, re-traumatized. the image that flasher has nothing with “promoting sexual violence exploitation” and everything with unmasking it, because how often does one get documentary proof sexual predation? almost never. and that’s one the most insidious part sexual harassment: its utter invisibility.', 'it’s like all women are big birds, and there’s this giant mastodon sexual predation only can see. but finally, here was proof. snuffleupagus exists! and here’s photo flasher prove it.', 'it’s been years since shot “shooting back,” and we’re finally talking about male predatory behavior toward women way that feels different, more urgent, thanks harvey weinstein’s outrageous use it. hasn’t stopped for me, nor for any us. lost column and bit decent extra income recently, after not answering editor’s email, which wrote, response email asking what time the staff pizza party began, pm. how come you’ve never asked out?” but until alyssa milano suggested tarana burke’s decade-old #metoo hashtag, until all our social media feeds were flooded with stories inappropriate male behavior and predation, i’m not sure how many men truly understood our silent pain: the aggressions themselves, course, but also the cone silence, the lack evidence, the fear being labeled woman who cries wolf. only this case, had the wolves prove it! wasn’t just crying wolf. was showing them you.', 'and then, usual this endless game wolf and prey, was summarily punished for exposing them.', '***update 10/19/17, 6:45 am: the comments below, man named brad cook from facebook saw this story and took swift action restore the original content. thank you, brad! appreciate it. i’ve made suggestions how this might avoided the future response your comment.']
cation leaves memories that last. everybody has story the eclectic curriculum they were offered, the epiphanies they had. can’t recall eighth grade math teacher’s name, but remember the venereal disease slideshow, classmate who claimed that woman’s breasts “stiffen” when she’s aroused, and the time had sexual assault hotline operator show explain what rape is. she impressed upon the sheer atrocity these crimes, well the long-term damage endured victims.', 'well into this lecture, she informed that men can victims, too, and started giving examples. she then arrived anecdote that changed her whole demeanor. was about man whose girlfriend handcuffed him their bed and started inserting foreign objects into his rectum painfully and against his protests. the woman listed the items used, including pencil, she was taken giggling fit. “i’m sorry,” she gasped, “it’s not funny, shouldn’t laugh.” but she did, and did the class. cannot forget the queasy jolt this laughter gave me. was clear that although had grimly mature discussing the terrifying abuse and violence women face, man suffering that way could viewed weird exception, not outright absurdity. he’s punchline.', 'there are many reasons why victims harassment physical abuse don’t always come forward right away, depending factors too numerous mention. women will course pilloried and threatened corrupt institutions and misogynist trolls for daring accuse man, but these antagonists start from the assumption that she’s making actually blame. with man, you can acknowledge the incident reported have problem trusting man’s version reality while still brushing off joke.', 'this happening right now the actor brendan fraser, who february went public with allegation that philip berk, one-time president the powerful hollywood foreign press association, groped his buttocks and poked his perineum (in fraser’s telling, his “taint”), even wiggling finger around the sensitive area. this was 2003, crowded area the beverly hills hotel, public view. the violation had fraser “overcome with panic and fear,” though berk gladly related the episode his memoir, leaving out the finger part and characterizing the ass-grab playful pinch.', 'the hfpa promised investigate fraser’s claims; three months later, they showed him their proposed follow-up statement. read, part: “although was concluded that mr. berk inappropriately touched mr. fraser, the evidence supports that was intended taken joke and not sexual advance.” again: happened, everyone agrees happened, but, well, doesn’t count, because man touching another man inappropriately can only gay come-on good-humored bonding behavior.', 'since the hfpa ruled out the former, had the latter. this homophobic binary conveniently omits the potential for psychological intimidation control the pure “alpha” move, were. yet know this power imbalance the dark center countless #metoo stories, even when the victims are men. the actor anthony rapp recalled, when just years old and younger-looking than that, how 26-year-old kevin spacey “picked like groom picks the bride over the threshold” and pressed him down bed, arms tightening around his body until was able squirm away. spacey’s now-infamous response attempted paint scene unfortunate drunken buffoonery, then pivoted “reveal” his sexual orientation order deflect from the disturbing particulars rapp’s account. became instant #metoo casualty, but never quite reckoned with his choice target and trap kid. india, where child rape has reached epidemic proportions, this exact unwillingness confront taboo same-sex dynamic which deepens the crisis: while rapists girls under years old can receive the death penalty, there’s equivalent law concerning assault boys.', 'fraser has rejected the hfpa ruling and declined sign the would-be “joint” statement, saying, don’t get the joke.” was not allowed read the report the the investigation obtain information how they reached the conclusion they did. berk confirmed that date remains voting member the association and has not been disciplined the leadership any way. this all familiar enough: thrown into the spotlight #metoo article, the organization that always turned blind eye these problems craves return the status quo. therefore pretends police itself, quietly, and with rather opaque methods, delivering verdict that ensures nothing will change. addressing fraser’s dissatisfaction with their favored spin, the hfpa nonetheless fed the media denial wrongdoing, citing their “need abide the investigation’s finding that the exchange [with berk] was not intended sexual advance.” still they insist the relative gayness the groping the sole metric for determining harm; still they ignore the countless nonsexual implications, professional personal, such encounter. their job was never assess whether berk wanted sleep with fraser, and still the statement rests assurances berk’s geniality. missing this time, however, was the critical word that drew fraser’s attention the original draft: “joke.”', 'that word carried awful weight. said that while women are permitted, small degree, their righteous anger predatory men influence, victimized men have duty reframe the same trauma homosocial horseplay. not add fuel the fire when it’s already burning hot. get over it, because men are tough, resilient, unemotional. that “joke” bore the stain youtube dudeworld, which any transgression theoretically undone with the desperate, magical phrase, “it’s just prank, bro!” alludes history movies and shows that take the tragedy prison rape opportunity for lighthearted innuendo, the casual sadism college hazing ceremonies and teen boys who make sport half-malicious, half-affectionate “nut taps.” told fraser overrule his visceral understanding what was doubt attempt dominate and demean him the hunky leading man hunk meat, owned full hollywood’s behind-the-scenes brokers and tell the world was funny.', 'this how victim-blame men: not for drinking too much wearing the wrong clothes seeking salacious fame, but for not playing along when another guy crosses line. the villains here invoke the same fraternity silence that gaslights and suppresses female victims. terry crews, actor with #metoo story much like fraser’s, shared email from the music producer russell simmons, who advised him give his abuser pass,” the assault had happened someone else, unknown either man, and then, way, nonexistent. would have reinforced the toxic assumption that men are invulnerable these attacks that victim is, essentially, woman.', 'this the ineluctable terminus the archaic gender essentialism that says: you’re not strong enough swallow your suffering, you’re not man. the courage crews and fraser have shown their willingness drill through that, and the danger they present the establishment the revelation that rape culture hurts everyone, not just women. being who they are, saying what they say, they dissolve the argument that #metoo more than hysterical “witch hunt” propaganda cooked radical feminists. they don’t fit the reactionary narrative.', 'if we’re shocked that tall, well-muscled, manly stars are instantly diminished and humiliated predators high places and stay silent for years, that’s measure how overrate their bodies and undervalue their inner lives, all the name destructive gender norms. regard these encounters implausible, since they don’t result explosion stereotypically masculine rage (why didn’t just punch the guy the face?), then the guilty parties will easily discount them unreal.', 'but the accused doesn’t set the meaning their offense, and it’s detestable use the specter homosexuality influence our reading, whether spacey trots out his identity for sympathy berk tells the hfpa that grabbed fraser’s butt without stirring arousal. crossroads for sexual politics where belief invaluable, doubt the most dangerous weapon, and the male code dividing “gay” from “no homo” smokescreen that creates it. don’t let these excuses for the inexcusable distract from the #metoo men’s united message: one immune abuse, nor the shame and hopelessness that come with it, and one can expected bury that for anyone.', 'miles klee staff writer mel. last wrote about how save miss america.', 'melmagazine.com', 'melmagazine.com', 'melmagazine.com', 'melmagazine.com', 'melmagazine.com']
'“separate the syllables the word gentleman, and you will see that the first requisite must gentleness gentle-man.”', '“few persons are sufficiently aware the power gentleness. slow working, but infallible its results.“', the gentlemen’s book etiquette and manual politeness cecil hartley', 'there are few things more dangerous than man whose confusion leads fear, which ultimately leads anger. right now many men are confused. some are downright scared. many believe that women wield new form power. some these same men accuse women conducting witch hunt. they claim they must contend with life-altering misinterpretations and career-ruining false allegations. they’re scared this new power they believe women will leverage against them. even superman’s afraid, you can believe it.', 'you know things are bad when the man steel quivers.', 'recently, actor henry cavill misspoke interview with australia intended promote his new movie mission impossible: fallout. his words lit firestorm controversy related the #metoo movement. asked about his thoughts the movement, cavill said:', 'there’s something wonderful about man chasing woman. there’s traditional approach that, which nice. think woman should wooed and chased, but maybe i’m old-fashioned for thinking that.', 'that’s not bad sentiment. anything, it’s perfectly harmless throwback expression masculinity. but then the superman actor went add:', 'it’s very difficult that there are certain rules place. because then it’s like: ‘well, don’t want and talk her, because i’m going called rapist something’. you’re like, ‘forget it, i’m going call ex-girlfriend instead, and then just back relationship, which never really worked’. but it’s way safer than casting myself into the fires hell, because i’m someone the public eye, and and flirt with someone, then who knows what’s going happen?', 'whoa, henry, hold your imaginary horses.', 'do you see where went wrong?', '“…difficult that there are certain rules place.”', '“because i’m going called rapist something.”', '“it’s way safer that casting myself into the fire hell…”', 'with those three statements, cast himself into the hell internet outrage. and rightfully so.', 'but what wrong with cavill’s statements? after all, many men these days feel exactly the same way.', 'the better question ask this: why superman afraid being called rapist? are false sexual assault allegations the new kryptonite? not exactly.', 'this comic book metaphor wholly incorrect (and adolescent) way looking our modern moment. first, women aren’t wielding any new power. haven’t eradicated abuse, harassment, and rape. the only change that the world finally, rightfully, listening women, and holding their abusers, harassers, and rapists accountable. that’s huge. that’s good. want more that.', 'those who claim the #metoo movement has gone too far, that it’s morphed into witch hunt, are focusing the wrong aspects sexual abuse. the #metoo movement has one simple aim: make the world safer for women ensuring women are free from sexual harassment, abuse, assault, and rape. this goal can’t “too far.”', 'yet some men, and even some women, think already has, will. although the hashtag originally conceived tarana burke came about more than ten years ago, the recent heat and light generated the #metoo conversation our culture not even year old, yet they already want discuss the hypothetical dangers for men. instead, need focus how #metoo brings justice victims abuse, harassment, assault, and rape. stop future abuse.', 'after some reflection, henry cavill seems have realized this truth. least his handlers and people urged him see the error his statements. was quick apologize.', 'but let’s not pick cavill, who genuinely seems like decent and old-fashioned guy (at least according his self-assessment). means alone fearing and criticizing the #metoo movement. fellow action stars matt damon and liam neeson have both made clumsy statements that were met with condemnation. damon, who often expresses himself ham-fisted ways, blundered into self-made controversy back december. january, neeson called the #metoo movement “something witch hunt.”', 'but it’s not just men who’ve criticized #metoo witch hunt, damon and neeson were soon followed french actress catherine deneuve, who said the exact same thing. she also quickly apologized and walked back her remarks after experiencing backlash.', 'you know who also labelled the #metoo movement witch hunt?', 'bill cosby’s lawyers. you’re the same side argument bill cosby’s lawyers, that alone should tell you something.', 'but here, let’s one further. kanye west’s friend and socio-political mentor, candace owens, wanted add her two cents. she tweeted:', 'thankfully, dispel owens’ nonsensical two-cent notion that definitions have been blurred, have all-around badass gentleman, terry crews. though once shared henry cavill’s mistaken criticisms and misplaced fears, his wife helped him see what matters most.', 'do you see how became crystal clear crews? stopped focusing himself, and instead, started focus the countless victims sex crimes.', 'crews reminds all, men and women alike, two things. the era #metoo, must get the habit listening women. must believe women. always. matter habit. will there exceptions the rule? absolutely. but this the new rule: listen women. essentially, men need re-dedicate themselves respecting women our equals, our partners.', 'you always want believe your partner. that’s vital trust.', 'additionally, thanks his powerful confession being sexually assaulted, terry crews widened the whole cultural discussion pointing out that not all victims sexual abuse are women. so, the larger message offers is: believe victims. always.', 'here’s the thing, guys. you have nothing worry about…if you don’t commit any sex crimes. pretty simple, right? you may thinking: but the boundaries are shifting. how know what can anymore, like, when can touch woman public? what take picture with her and suddenly hand–', 'i’ll stop you right there. don’t that guy. don’t come with wild-ass hypotheticals. last week, video game developer mark kern attracted online backlash after tweeted something intending highlight the difficult position modern men are when comes approaching women:', 'kern then added another kinky robotic condition that would arise from men surrendering control partners:', 'to conclude his thread, kern admits that hyperbole not real solution. rather, it’s intended satire. (he’s sure asking the word satire lot work this instance.)', 'satire not, kern overlooks huge loophole his knee-jerk logic. men who are sexually interested women are “not mind readers,” then how did get along before? did kern and, extension, all straight men, just sort blunder forward and hope for the best? what happened they were wrong? turned out that their “first move” was uninvited sexual contact, are supposed blame the woman for not giving clear signals? was her fault that man tried kiss her?', 'see point? there are two fatal fallacies the inherent logic kern’s (satirical) argument: blaming victims, and his notion “mind reading” measure whether man should initiate sexual contact makes clear that that past:', 'in order protect men from the possible sting rejection (or the mistake not being “mind reader”), kern urges focus how can protect men’s feelings how mitigate the potential risk their careers, reputations, and legacies. but long men are excused for their confusion, sex crimes are likely continue.', 'so let’s clear any confusion. look, guys. promise you can make the first move without any worry being sexual abuser having pillar-to-post and say “it’s all women” now that you feel safe. that’s far too simplistic. we’re better than that.', 'no, you don’t have mind reader. you don’t even always need stop and ask, “can kiss you?” but you feel unsure, perhaps you should. question removes all confusion. it’s far better than pressing into dangerous uncertainty. asking “can kiss you?” protects both parties that fraught moment.', sexual interaction never just about the initiator. like, obviously, right? all get that. it’s about everyone involved. never lose sight this. you and your proposed sexual partner are equals. you must respect women people, not bed them conquests whose objections trepidations must overcome.', 'this ain’t the mythical fifties. women don’t need maintain their virtue. case you missed it, women are definitely lusty sexual creatures. they want get their freak on, too. trust. but they only want with men they feel comfortable with, men they’re attracted to, men they invite into their physical space.', 'when comes sexual interactions with woman, comfort key. and should always part your sexual protocol. she’s not comfortable alone with you, then she definitely doesn’t want you her body. woman’s comfort the first step seduction. you cannot skip past that.', 'here. just flip for second.', 'imagine some woman you weren’t interested latched herself onto your lips like aliens face-hugger and started tongue-punching you without your permission. she groped your crotch some fumbling attempt feel your junk through your jeans. you would feel violated, right? you would feel assaulted, correct? now flip back around. you want the aliens face-hugger? nah, son. you not. don’t be.', 'also, you should never try cajole beg coax coerce guilt leverage with power contractual obligations, whether explicit implied, woman into giving you sexual attention repaying your kindness loyalty with sexual favors. don’t ever that guy. he’s punk-ass. he’s abuser. even “it’s all legal.”', 'if you’re looking for guaranteed sexual interaction, hire sex worker. that’s their job.', 'otherwise, you are always dealing with adult woman, one who has her own sexual agenda, and you need her agenda align with yours. equals. simple.', 'but let’s move past any vague set musts and don’ts. for any man reading this who feels confused about how approach woman, how converse with woman sexual manner, how initiate sexual contact, there are ways this right, well, and effectively.', 'in that same australia interview, actor henry cavill shares his personal guide being gentleman, one who lives the top his game. cavill keeps his cell phone list 100 bullet points how the best man you can be. many his rules are well-articulated and highly useful. some cavill’s bullet points recommend:', '19. the most positive and enthusiastic person you know.', '20. loosen up; relax. except for rare life-or-death matters, nothing important first seems.', '26. modest. lot was accomplished before you were born.', 'and perhaps most important:', '41. show respect for everyone who works for living, regardless how trivial their job.', 'show respect for everyone. this includes your potential sexual partners. but how can you show respect for women the era #metoo and still act sexualized manner without being labelled abuser, harasser, rapist?', 'it’s way easier than you think.', 'be gentleman.', 'in 1860, cecil hartley wrote the gentlemen’s book etiquette and manual politeness. his advice for gentlemen timely today was just before the start the civil war but help you out, added modern update italics. this way, you can see that while things change, sexual etiquette remains the same. consider these the new-old rules sexual engagement.', '1. “never join lady whom you may meet, without first asking her permission so.”', gentleman should always ask woman his presence welcome.', 'example: “is anyone sitting here? would you mind joined you?”', '2. “in meeting lady not offer shake hands with her, but accept her hand when she offers for you take.”', 'definitely never initiate physical contact with woman first. always allow her the first so.', 'example: when bar (or other social space where flirtation expected), not touch woman until she’s first touched you. sounds kinda victorian, right? it’s not. touch intimate. it’s means flirting. she likes you, she will let you know, likely with playful touch. let her initiate that game.', '3. “when inviting lady dance, she replies very politely, asking excused, she does not wish dance (‘with you,’ being probably her mental reservation), man ought satisfied. all events, should never press her dance after one refusal.”', 'learn gracefully take “no” answer, without acting like colossal ass. and never insult her for saying “no.” it’s always her right so.', 'example: you approach woman public space and she blows you off, just wish her good day and walk on…like gentleman.', '4. “the lady who was very amiable you last night, has right ignore your existence to-day. fact, ballroom acquaintance rarely goes any further, until you have met more balls than one. prudent man will never presume girl’s liveliness banter.”', 'just because she was chill with you yesterday doesn’t mean you should expect anything today. woman always reserves the right change her mind. other words, women don’t owe you shit.', '5. “perhaps the true definition gentleman this: ‘whoever open, loyal, and true; whoever humane and affable demeanor; whoever honorable himself, and his judgment others, and requires law but his word make him fulfill engagement; such man gentleman, the highest lowest rank life, man elegant refinement and intellect, the most unpolished tiller the ground.’”', 'to gentleman requires that you respectful, graceful, and most all, gentle. imagine what cinematic gentleman cary grant might do. then, that.', '6. “true courtship consists number quiet, gentlemanly attentions, not pointed alarm, not vague misunderstood.”', 'be clear your approach and intent, and always keep your words and actions gentleman-ly smooth.', 'example: before you initiate any sexual contact, check see that she’s comfortable your presence. she’s never physically touched you playful way, then, man, she ain’t into you. you need that clearance, that tacit permission, before you ever think pressing your lips hands onto her body. call consent check.', 'let’s conclude with quote from homie, cecil hartley. speaks the undeniable power gentleness:', 'the progressive dawn day, the flow the tide, the lapse time, the changes the seasons these are carried slow and imperceptible degrees, yet their progress and issue none can mistake resist. equally certain and surprising are the triumphs gentleness.', 'you see how that plays out, right? with the flow respect and the touch grace, the correct order events and the right sequence actions, man, you need not worry you’ll misinterpreted harasser, labeled abuser, called rapist. besides, gentleness way more effective than conquest. gets more done. trust that. confident gentleman is, and always will be, sexy af. ain’t nothing changed about that.', 'but you still don’t feel like you know how approach woman the #metoo era, visualize yourself doing this easy step-by-step:', 'start saying “hi.” then, follow that with joke, compliment not based her body. she responds favorably, enjoy flirtatious conversation. but she doesn’t have time for you, she rebuffs your initial greeting, wish her good day, and get with your life.', 'trust that women are sexual beings, too. they don’t need you overcome their objections. they don’t want you convince them have sex. they’re not looking for surprise, some out-of-the-blue kiss, unsolicited dick pic, nasty comment. there’s need for modern man aggressor. her partner. you know, like dance partner. you wouldn’t yank your dance partner around the floor and call fun. instead, you want graceful, smooth, and moving time.', 'before you press your body onto anyone else sexual way, the invitation from them should always clear you the sun the sky. just like there’s mistaking the presence the sun, there should mistaking woman’s sexual interest you.', 'it’s really just that simple. whether you’re regular man superman.']
t’s not because don’t have them.', 'content warning: descriptions sexual assault', hundred and twenty two men.', 'that’s how many prominent politicians, writers, musicians, filmmakers, and public figures have been publicly accused sexual harassment and sexual assault since harvey weinstein left the weinstein company. the last week alone, junot diaz joined that growing list, did new york attorney general eric schneiderman, and the nobel prize scandal highlighted the experiences women working with one the world’s most prestigious literary organizations. suppose that brings our list 123.', 'clearly, are far from ending this epidemic. but finally, for once, institutions are beginning name the behavior the men who make unwanted remarks and unwelcome ultimatums, who expose themselves, who demand our bodies. for once, we’re learning believe women.', 'the women coming forward are undeniably courageous: young and old, rich and poor, famous and unknown. and overwhelmingly, they’re thin.', 'but 67% american women are plus size. where are the fat women?', was years old, and size 18, the first time man told he’d fantasized about raping me.', 'he told that longed pin hands behind head, yearned hear tell him no. you’ll fight off, but you’ll love every minute it.', 'the women coming forward are undeniably courageous: young and old, rich and poor, famous and unknown. and overwhelmingly, they’re thin.', was shaken, confused, disoriented. spoke, every breath drained from waiting lungs, siphoned his certainty that i’d grateful for his violence. you’ll love every minute it. the life veins seeped from body into the ground wished would swallow whole.', 'over time, men’s fantasies became part the fabric experience. the years that followed, more and more men would disclose their desire assault me. when told one stop, mid-twenties, was taken aback. thought you were liberated. you should grateful.', 'the menacing ghost gratitude followed everywhere. was queer, which meant was expected sexually flexible, unfettered boundaries and unlikely say no, available posed any scene position needed for men’s gratification. and was fat, which meant should grateful for what got. even was violent. even didn’t consent.', 'when finally disclosed this pattern thinner friends, anticipated some knowing commiseration, some tools for survival. after all, we’d spent plenty time developing shared strategies for creepy coworkers and lecherous neighbors. but many them, this ravenous violence was foreign interaction, reason call police, run away, tell every woman knew, something drastic. desperate measures.', 'for thin friends, rape fantasies were exception, the provenance particularly depraved kind man. for me, they were the rule: commonplace routine. around fat women, seemingly any man could that particularly depraved kind.', 'more troubling were the reactions from thin acquaintances. family friend and self-proclaimed feminist, upon hearing about this onslaught fantasies, congratulated me. isn’t great wanted? and, more troublingly, there’s lid for every pot. had been disheartened about the selection men who would take me. their violence were sign hope. were just misguided expression attraction.', 'one friend asked why hadn’t told anyone sooner. was surprised her question when the answer felt plain. like many women before me, when share stories harassment, catcalling, unwelcome advances, and violence, met with pushback. unlike other women, that resistance comes question:', 'who would want rape you?', 'while thin women were free talk about sexual assault being somehow divorced from desire rape about power, not sex didn’t have that luxury. fat woman, body was seen inherently undesirable. any sexual attention fat women receive treated windfall worthy congratulations, erroneous impossibility, out-and-out lie. fat women are expected grateful for any expressions that could mistaken for want, including assault and harassment. are exposed unvarnished kind desire, its most violent self, because are expected hold and nurture whatever scraps we’re offered.', 'sometimes, our harassment takes more menacing turn, relying reinforcing our rejection, rather than our assumed gratitude. fat acquaintance recently told that, her workplace, men openly discussed who they would and wouldn’t sleep with. she often heard her own body used punchline colossally undesirable, comically unwanted. just wanted work,” she said. even when we’re unwanted, harassment still finds us.', 'when fat women muster the courage come forward about our experiences with sexual assault, we’re significantly less likely believed about our experiences than our thinner counterparts. while thin women face dismal rates prosecution and conviction for their sexual assaults, fat women are often dismissed out hand making open season our bodies. the cultural belief that fat women are unlovable, that fat bodies are undesirable, offers warm petri dish, hospitable home for men’s bacterial desires grow.', 'it took years disclose own experiences. because, like any woman, knew that stepping forward would mean standard denials, scrutiny, dismissals. but for all our talk about sexual assault being act power, not desire, fat woman, knew that those statements always came with caveats, asterisks, footnotes. knew that body was reliably withheld, obvious exception the rule.', 'after all, who would want rape us? should grateful.', 'our national conversation about sexual assault and harassment has become important flashpoint. notably, has been largely led hollywood actresses the jessica albas, salma hayeks, and rose mcgowans known for their legendary beauty.', 'but order flourish, that conversation will have hold space for women whose leadership struggle respect, whose bodies struggle embrace. even those who, our heart hearts, still expect grateful. because our feminism fails acknowledge the humanity 67% us, who will that victory serve?']
'mark halperin wants his career back. the political pundit and author, fired 2017 after dozen women accused him sexual misconduct, has been busy working new book, launching his blog, and conducting radio interviews. even wants get back television but that front, was stymied his ex-boss, msnbc network chief phil griffin.', 'despite halperin’s attempted push back into the public eye, said public hasn’t shown much interest. the strategists who lent their names his book have now expressed regret, and the backlash against his media appearances and blog continue unabated.', 'perhaps one eager see halperin back politics because the severity and number accusations against him: the game change author was accused pressing his erect penis against multiple women, grabbing woman’s breasts, masturbating front colleague, throwing woman against window and, when rejected, calling woman tell her she’d never work media again.', 'or maybe it’s because halperin isn’t and never was that amazing his job. the two years since he’s been out sight, one has bemoaned the lack his voice work. there’s been great gaping hole political analysis his absence.', 'the country went without him, and we’re just fine.', 'there genius and talent around every corner plenty nonwhite and nonmale, even!', 'the same could said for most the men outed abusers these last few years. despite fears that the exits people like charlie rose matt lauer would create some broader cultural loss, these supposed vanguards have barely been missed.', 'it seems we’re seeing unintended benefit the #metoo movement: debunking the irreplaceable male genius myth.', 'as #metoo gained steam, and abusers started shunned fired, some men argued that the world would the worse for it. harper’s, for example, lionel shriver wrote that “the party that really pays for the new puritanism [is] the arts consumer.” and the wake the accusations against musician ryan adams, one columnist warned that “expect our artists paragons,” that audiences will “stuck with lot mediocre art.”', 'apparently these creators were incredible and talented, that the world just couldn’t afford lose their work, even they did sexually harass abuse others. men’s accomplishments and potential contributions, seemed, far outweighed any concerns over women’s safety.', 'in fact, women barely rated all. after the new york review books published piece jian ghomeshi the former radio host accused punching and choking multiple women then-editor ian buruma responded criticism saying, “the exact nature his behavior how much consent was involved have idea, nor really concern.” buruma was later fired.', 'for all the words spilled and social capital lost over men supposedly couldn’t live without, the “arts consumer” doing just fine.', 'comedy still funny without watching louis c.k., and movies are still fantastic without harvey weinstein. everyone still binge-watching television shows without les moonves, and one thinking about ghomeshi when they listen their morning radio hour.', 'in part, think that’s what really scares the men participating the backlash against #metoo: it’s not just that they’re worried about being fired, but also that they ultimately won’t missed.', 'the truth there are genius and talent around every corner plenty nonwhite and nonmale, even! the industries that men were rightfully forced out have moved and thrived, oftentimes replacing outed abusers with female employees.', 'we don’t need keep harassers the payroll order give the world great art, music, writing, comedy. maybe their absence will even allow for new voices ones that have traditionally been drowned forced out.']
ides what men are? decided decree? popular vote? decided you, individual men?', little while back was talking with man knew about consent. was commenting article had shared earlier that day men who get women drunk the hopes that will increase their chances getting laid. sat living room and told that took issue with the essay’s insistence that this behavior was predatory abusive. was little surprised how could know someone for multiple years, and they could claim longtime fans work, and they still could not get why this sort very common behavior wasn’t okay. woman who had experienced this sort pressure and manipulation multiple times, was clear me, from how made feel, that wasn’t okay. decided ask him few questions.', '“hey, you know dude work and you think it’s cool and you want hang out but doesn’t really want wants home, but you just keep buying him beers he’ll stay would you say that really wants hang out with you?”', '“no,” admitted, “but ”', '“okay, and you kept buying him beers, knowing full well that you did not buy him beers would leave because otherwise wouldn’t want hang out with you, and the end the night felt sick and angry and liked you even less than when you first asked him hang out but wasn’t into it, would you then call your buddies and brag about the awesome hang-out time you just had?”', '“no,” said, longer trying interject.', '“and you thought that was the only way you could get people hang out with you, get them drunk that they wouldn’t say ‘no’ strongly they would otherwise, would you feel good about yourself person? would you consider yourself friend?”', 'it was clear the look his face that no, would not, concluded questions with one more.', '“so, you wouldn’t dream coercing dude against his will hang out with you and still call ‘fun hang-out session,’ why would you coerce woman sleep with you and still call consensual sex? why don’t women get the same basic respect sexual intimacy that you afford your bros while watching the game? that the type man you want be?”', 'theestablishment.co', 'as watch countless men (and sadly, quite few women) jump the defense other men who have been outed for their coercive, demeaning, and abusive behavior towards women; watch them debate the fine points whether not woman said loud enough, whether her “i’m not comfortable” was strong enough, whether she was fault for being mistreated not yelling, hitting, running want ask them all this question: this the type man you want be?', 'because this debate, this long, harmful, regressive debate how hard women should have fight against man who does not seek affirmative, enthusiastic consent order not fault for the ways which men choose ignore their bodily autonomy, men are showing and women everywhere what type men they want be:', 'men who not care about what the women their lives want.', 'men who want the company women but also not care about whether not those women enjoy their company.', 'men who cajole, convince, guilt, and annoy women into having sex with them.', 'theestablishment.co', 'men who believe that victory lies not the enthusiastic consent their sexual partners, but the tired, resigned, and often scared surrender unwilling partners.', 'men who believe that the bodies and wills women are conquered.', 'men who are fine with women entering into dates with them knowing that the only way they are going get out having sex with them they fight against with everything they have.', 'men who think that spending evening feeling sexually frustrated over being aroused woman while not being able have sex the worst possible outcome for sexual encounter.', 'men who would settle for woman leaving sexual encounter with them feeling violated, hurt, and betrayed, than have sexual encounter with that woman all.', 'theestablishment.co', 'you aren’t just defending individual these debates. and you are not defending men whole. you are defending this behavior. you are fighting for its continuation, and the continuation the harm that does countless women. you are fighting for your right the next man who chooses ignore multiple verbal and nonverbal signals from woman saying that she does not want have sex with you. you are fighting for your right the next man who calls car for crying woman who you’ve made feel degraded and used. you are fighting for your right the next man that she’s talking about when she tells her friends about how traumatic her evening was.', 'that’s the man you are fighting be. that’s the type man you are fighting for your sons, your cousins, your friends, and your son-in-law be.', 'is this really what you want? are you willing own that? openly say and still have any self-respect?', hear often from men who are astounded that would ask for much. affirmative consent?? we’ve gone too far! we’ve lost our grip! aren’t dealing reality!', 'but who decides what men are? who decides how men should act? decided decree? popular vote? decided you, individual men?', 'you are fighting for your right the next man that she’s talking about when she tells her friends about how traumatic her evening was.', 'right now, the midst this rising discussion around sexual abuse and assault, you men have the chance look all right the face. you have the chance look the type men you have been. you have the chance look how you’ve been treating women and how you define your relationships with them. you have the chance re-evaluate what you deem “victory” “defeat.” you have the chance determine for yourselves what you consider healthy and satisfying sexual romantic encounter.', 'you have the chance right now, while it’s all being brought up, decide that the way you’ve been not the way you want be. you have the chance decide that you not want the women your life fear you, survive you, endure you, resent you. you have the chance decide that you not want dominate, conquer, overcome, defeat the women you claim love and respect. and you have the chance decide that you longer want associate, through your words and actions, with men who want continue this type man.', 'you get decide that now. you get hear about the way which women have been harmed men and decide better man. you get defend that notion man. you get debate for this change. you get fervently argue that you will longer accept this old, abusive notion manhood. you get choose better path.', 'or you can keep arguing uphold the way things are.', 'but know that with whichever way you decide, you are telling us, and yourself, what type man you want be.', 'theestablishment.co']
'one evening watched ron jeremy scavenge the leftover food few the table didn’t eat. was surreal experience sitting across from one the largest names the porn industry and, personal level, someone whose videos i’d seen.', '“he does this,” friend craig told me.“does what?”“never orders anything. just scavenges everyone else’s leftovers once they’re done eating.”', continued observe the man nicknamed “the hedgehog” pluck fries from his niece’s plate. then pulled out old motorola flip phone from the pajama pants wore the restaurant.', 'craig motioned ron with subtle nod his head, “watch this.”', 'ron produced monocle mini telescope, wasn’t sure from his jacket read his text messages.', '“he won’t buy new phone. god knows has the money. keep telling him it’ll easier see messages smartphone, but…”', '“but gotta keep those good jewish habits!” ron chimed in.', 'earlier the evening, craig and ron debated the subject pornography front large audience austin, texas. met craig several years earlier after took steps crush the control pornography had over life. early the dot com boom craig founded organization named xxxchurch with goal helping christians combat their pornography consumption addiction. former youth pastor, many young males his church shared about their widespread porn usage wreaking hell their personal lives. first, the christian community damn near crucified (and vilified) him, but once the widespread usage hit pastors and led scandal, they played different tune. good deed goes unpunished christendom, right?', 'in real life, craig and ron are friends. craig’s kids call him “uncle ron” but have idea what does. their friendship formed because working the porn industry separate sides, both took their debate the road universities and churches.', 'in all fairness, felt ron won the debate that night. was charming, articulate, and made several candid points. wasn’t the porn industry’s fault people got hooked did deviant things. “in fact,” ron grinned held gold embossed piece paper, “here’s certificate appreciation from the fbi our industry. we’ve worked with law enforcement report minors who’ve ended porn and exploited the managers who’ve used minors.”', 'craig could have gone harder him, but stuck more charismatic presence the stage focusing the unrealistic expectations porn promises. maybe didn’t have all the stats that night, never asked. hell, some the research was brand new the time.', 'but it’s not anymore, and what it’s doing men and women across the globe has direct impact why #metoo happened and why keep seeing repeat stories the increase sexual assault and rape culture.', 'it’s longer the dirty little secret, but the monster rampaging our society.', 'after the harvey weinstein scandal and recent events exposing widespread sexual assault, the public outcry has become overwhelming. read through numerous articles (and even wrote own) the topic, but one thing found disturbing was the amount men and women who continued advocate from porn (whether medium other media outlets). “jerk responsible porn” one author said way combat sexual assault and support women. “amateur, non-binary, one that doesn’t promote violence.” was like listening someone tell there’s such thing fair, trade organic porn. it’s been responsibly filmed and women were degraded the filming these sex scenes. yeah, right.', 'the notion alone absurd, because how it’s filmed, amateur not, consenting not, romantic not, has nothing with what porn usage does neurologically and emotionally.', 'in 2011, leading psychologist philip zimbardo released tedtalk and subsequent book titled “the demise guys.” one finding his talk focused men preferring porn women and longer “knowing the difference between making love and doing porn.” pointed video games and porn being new addiction dubbed “arousal addiction.” whereas drugs and alcohol you want more the same, with porn your taste constantly evolves.', 'additional research supports what zimbardo found and explains the process like twisted version pavlov’s dog. people think they’re being entertained, but their brains are busy building connections between the arousal they feel and what’s happening screen. the brain becomes more accustomed the porn they’ve seen, they have move new and extreme forms porn get aroused. thus the porn user consumes changes over time.', 'for instance, who their right mind starts out watching child porn? you can read story after story men who’ve gone jail for child porn who claim they started out with the “normal” stuff. i’m not saying you watch porn, you’ll end with fbi agent your door because you got into kiddie porn, but the research scary. 2012 survey 1,500 young adult men, 56% said their tastes porn had become “increasingly extreme deviant.”', 'that alone should worry you.', 'in college and the military, common phrase would hear was “she wanted even she didn’t know yet.” hey-day chuckled the statement and probably said myself. course, were all watching porn, sharing it, and assumed the behavior was normal. after all, porn emphasized that mentality.', 'in article non-profit organization fight the new drug they state:', '…a team researchers looked the most popular porn films the ones purchased and rented most often. the 304 scenes the movies contained, 88% contained physical violence and 49% contained verbal aggression. average, only one scene didn’t contain any aggression, and the typical scene averaged physical verbal attacks. one particularly disturbing scene managed fit 128.', 'but back those who say only consume organic, fair trade porn right?', 'unfortunately for them, research confirms that those who consume porn (even it’s nonviolent) are more likely support statements that promote abuse and sexual aggression toward women. degrading porn (which stated earlier people will move into with repeated consumption) increases user’s dominating and harassing behavior toward others and leaves the user feeling less compassion for rape victims.', 'if you’re still not convinced, article from the journal communication pornography consumption and actual acts sexual aggression researchers said the following after examining twenty two studies:', there little doubt that, the average, individuals who consume pornography more frequently are more likely hold attitudes conducive sexual aggression and engage actual acts sexual aggression.”', 'you can’t. dutch researchers found porn the most addictive online activity. the only thing even close online gambling, and that’s still number two. also, experiment for me. month without porn (if you can) and then come back and tell how hard it’s been not look porn. friend once told me, “anything you can’t give owns you.”', '2. “porn isn’t really that big deal.”', 'porn revenue exceeds that the nfl, mlb, and nba combined. also exceeds the revenue television networks cbs, nbc, and abc combined. child porn generates three billion dollars annually and the number one searched type porn the internet “teen.” seems like big deal.', '3. “this the porn industry’s fault!”', 'not really. this supply and demand. people understand the risks associated with cigarettes and still use them. porn legal (for the most part) and regulated some degree. however, most people don’t understand how supply and demand for porn has such dark side. stated, its side effects can lead sexual aggression, the exploitation women and children (more common than men), and fuels the sex trafficking industry. the fault lies those who continue ignore the research while letting our minds and emotions become warped the point indifference and aggression.', 'if you’re parent, you should care (the average age child exposed porn eleven). you’re spouse, you should care what could your partner. you don’t want date guy girl that might put you the #metoo category because they love porn, you should care. you watch porn, you should know and care what the consequences are.', 'basically, you want build less violent world and respect your fellow humans, the answer simple: start taking steps stop watching porn', 'your relationships, love life, and sex life deserve better.', '**author’s note: the research the topic pornograhy consumption extensive and vast. many organization have done their fair share reporting peer reviewed research. should you like review the research you can visit fight the new drug facts page truth about porn.']
past few days, i’ve watched female friend after female friend post the same update.', '#metoo.', 'each update has seen these brave women opening candidly and honestly about the abuse they’ve suffered the hands men.', 'from unwanted advances violent assault and rape, and every shitty experience in-between, it’s been sobering and raw thing watch unfold, and heart aches for each and every one friends, and their friends, and all the friends friends not know, yet share common enemy.', 'men.', 'because let’s face it, there’s only one common denominator all this, and that’s men who feel entitled that women are little more than plaything toy with when the moment takes.', 'and the only people who can really change this mindset are the ones who are responsible for it, either through inaction, complicity, silent knowledge, like past mistakes that don’t see mistakes until it’s too late.', 'how many times have you heard that? variations it?', 'boys will boys. he’s just finding his way. he’s just learning about hormones and what man.', 'too many, i’d wager. far too many. woman, bet you’re sick and fucking tired that shitty excuse being paraded every single time guy gets caught with his hands where they shouldn’t be.', 'as guy, can pretty much guarantee you’ve heard that excuse for your indiscretions. hell, bet you’ve heard often, from people who should know better, that became your stock defence.', 'except it’s not defence. it’s not okay.', 'and it’s not acceptable excuse for your shitty behaviour.', 'when was 13, maybe 14, heard that few times from stepdad. lived council estate the scottish borders, and come the evenings after school, the weekends in-between, and friends would hang out and try and impress girls with our bravado.', 'riding bikes with hands, hanging off the monkey bars with one foot, etc. all good fun, all harmless flirting until wasn’t.', 'when the girls didn’t show interest, we’d chase them. we’d laugh, and they’d laugh, and was fun.', 'until wasn’t.', 'until group four boys caught with one the girls, and we’d “cop feel”. we’d hug them, and kiss their cheeks, and say “you’re our girlfriend now!”', 'and everyone would laugh. except, really, only the boys would genuinely laugh. sure, the girl would laugh too, but was different.', laugh that said everything:', 'i’m playing along, because that’s all can really do, but this not ok.', 'this not ok.', 'and, course, were excused our dads/stepdads/men our lives, and told it’s just for fun and part growing up.', 'it’s just what boys do.', 'but it’s fucking not, and never should be!', 'when did decide that? how did get the point where for boys, it’s just part growing up, but for girls, well, clearly they were asking for it?', 'and why did no-one speak and say was wrong?', 'it was only after was talking one the girls that played the park alongside us, few weeks after our game “chase”, that the truth came out.', 'how she was terrified. not just us, but what she’d called home her dad found out.', 'because, yes, boys will just boys, but daughter becomes slut because she’s the one that got caught the pack?', 'fuck. that. shit.', hadn’t thought that time teen until this week, and all the #metoo examples came crashing through like hurricane pain.', 'because, truth told, along with friends that summer had been conditioned believe were just having fun.', 'it’s not real no-one gets hurt, right?', 'except real and the victim always gets hurt. always.', 'do you honestly believe no-one gets hurt when you’re their space, their face, their safe zone, and you’re laughing while there, because that’s just “boys having fun”??', 'if you do, you’re fucking moron. know, because was that moron.', 'it took girl i’d chased and made truly afraid show that. how can that correct?', 'how can the person pain need the one that shows it’s not right? not acceptable? not “fun”?', 'simple shouldn’t be. because it’s not their job to.', 'it’s ours, so-called “men”, do. and not just today, and not just for us.', 'but every day, for every man, teach every boy well each other, that this can never right. this can never excused away just boys being boys.', 'because when was the last time you heard “oh, that’s just girls being girls, who cares they’re grabbing that boy’s crotch”?', 'exactly.', 'so.', 'we have choice. can look ourselves, and admit were part the problem (and still are, remain silent) and speak about it, and fix it, and support women that are still going through it, every single day.', 'or, can remain silent, safe the belief that were never “like that”.', 'except, you take the latter choice, i’m going call you out liar.', 'because, much like almost 100% female friends’ feed has #metoo example, i’m willing bet that almost 100% male friends has been responsible for that some point their life.', 'and you haven’t, you truly haven’t, salute you, and hope you pass that your kids, your male friends, your male peers. because you are truly one the very few men who has never mistreated woman friend, lover, peer, some form other.', 'for the rest us? don’t stay silent. speak up, apologize, and fix this shit, starting today.', 'teach our sons about respect, and restraint, and the fact that means no, with absolutely zero wiggle room. and teach them about equality and being the kind man that stands against what very clearly not okay.', 'and teach our daughters they not have dress certain way, nor they have act certain way, because that’s “just what girls are meant do”.', 'teach that, and more. and teach daily. until one day, don’t need draw lesson plans like this, because should have been common fucking sense from the start.', 'it’s the very least the better half this planet deserve.']
'the purpose terrorism spread terror. this should statement the obvious, but apparently isn’t. terrorists want feel afraid. they want cause maximum disruption our lives, the way live those lives, our democracy. the greater impact, the greater the success terrorism.', 'last night like hundreds thousands londoners was having drink with friends. that’s what people were doing borough market historic corner london with thriving restaurants, bars, pubs when they were callously attacked three hate-filled murdering terrorists.', 'as the news came in, sent few tweets, one them follows:', 'this was swiftly taken katie hopkins (vengeful her recent sacking) and the official leave.eu account, which tweeted, “that’s nice for you, @owenjones84. meanwhile, others are having their throats slit the name allah. glad you’re not scared though.”', 'this isn’t post defence: it’s post defence refusing terrified terrorism. deleted that tweet quickly because felt was being intentionally and despicably distorted, though was somehow boasting great night out after people had been murdered. that’s not the case, despite hordes twitter accounts hailing from various parts the united states currently claiming otherwise.', 'as happens, was worried about friends who, thankfully (as far know) are safe. that pub, people were laughing and chatting, and they weren’t scared cowed. that’s fact. and all over london last night, after the attack, for many hours, people continued laugh, chat, drink, dance. not because they didn’t care. many them undoubtedly spent many minutes texting, calling, getting touch with friends find out they were safe. but they carried living their lives. they weren’t scared cowed terrorist fanatics who want them feel burning terror and fear every waking moment that they have, steal away their happiness and their security.', 'what would have been the alternative? for london’s pubs, bars, restaurants, clubs all empty their patrons fled home terror? bolt their doors, stay inside, venture outside only when necessary, eyeing suspiciously everything and anything?', 'today, london carries on. quiet london-standards because it’s sunday. there are people the parks. some have gone for swim. others have taken their kids out. others are the pub, drinking: can see them from windows. others are watching box sets home. their lives are continuing. they are not scared, and they are not cowed, and they are not allowing fanatics win ruining their lives.', 'yes, need debate about dealing with extremism and fanaticism this country. nobody should argue otherwise. and let’s have it.', 'but that does not mean tolerating accepting huge disruption our lives and our democracy, which would both gift and incentivise terrorism. london, like manchester, full resilience, full humanity. it’s also full people getting annoyed with each other about standing the left sides escalators, tourists for abruptly stopping busy walkways, and people with overly loud headphones public transport. still london, nothing has changed.', 'today mourn those who have been murdered. when their names come out, let’s read about their lives, about what their loved ones say about then, about their passions and personalities, and all the rest.', 'and let’s not feel terrified, but full renewed solidarity for one another terrorists try and fail spread terror.', 'and that’s why that tweet, which should not have deleted, was one defiance against terrorist fanatics who want cowering and fearful and terrified. and any suggestion behave any other way dangerous capitulation terrorist mayhem, and must not happen.']
went his high school when the year old mr. hacked into the largest internet company the world and stole million credit card numbers.', '“you are going jail for long time,” they told him.', 'the day after stole them sent them back the company and explained what their cyber security flaws were.', 'he thought they would thank him.', 'the fbi came arrest him. was scared death,” told when first met.', 'the head the school, three star general, told them, “you guys better get out here you aren’t writing this boy check and saying thank you.”', 'they left.', 'then.', 'two years later when mr. graduated got “the call”. the call that meant wouldn’t college.', 'the call that meant would parachute into enemy fire, hack foreign governments, hack our own computers. “i’ve done many things,” once told me. “you can’t imagine.”', 'the call from three initial agency. more than one.', 'we met dinner. were both obsessed with hacking and the latest flaws computer security. ignored every else and spoke for three hours.', 'and haven’t stopped talking since.', don’t mean this conspiracy theory. there’s already been rumors about “fake news”, election hacking, etc.', 'there are bot armies. there are hackers taking down electric grids every day. every company the fortune 500 completely hacked. your computer hacked.', 'i’ve spent many years talking people the security space.', 'the reality is: the war on.', 'and it’s being fought with data. and it’s being fought all over the world. and it’s being fought every day.', 'not just election systems. big companies. but your computer. and the war not always being fought the people you expect. the enemeies were always trained believe.', 'mr. spent time special forces. was every overseas battle. has been involved more news stories than likes admit.', 'he’s also built and sold two companies using his hacking abilities. lives good life now and doesn’t want his voice identity revealed.', 'so distorted for the podcast.', asked him, “do you still work for ‘them’ “.', 'he turned away and said, “you never stop working for them.”', 'the goal this isn’t scare people. information power.', 'and this some what i’ve learned from mr. x.', '1. you want have voice, you have speak', '“in the past, against institution, you need institution.” mr. said. “now more than ever, need stand for what believe in. have these powerful, engaging tools influence others, but still leave the powers that control influence us.', 'if you believe something, share it.', 'in other words, don’t let the media “program” what you believe in. don’t let the online word “hack” into your brain. they already know more about you than you know about yourself. and they use that knowledge against you hours day.', 'if you want have voice, you have speak.', '2. police yourself', 'we were talking about computer security. told all the ways you could hacked… that you would never think of.', '“let ask you, when’s the last time you updated your firmware your router?”', had idea.', '“if i’m going in, i’m going through the router,” said. “the majority the fortune 500 use the same router… you either trust the government police data you need that person.”', 'and that was just one weakness. next time you are your phone check out how many apps your phone have permission turn your video camera and start recording and transmitting what they record without you being aware.', 'don’t think they aren’t doing it.', '3. how did osama bin laden really die?', 'was osama bin laden really casually sleeping the third floor building with access out? was prisoner and had lost our use for him?', 'mr. “he was our prisoner for years. then had use for him.”', 'always question everything the media and the government tells us. always skeptic world where it’s not anyone’s benefit tell you the truth.', 'this not conspiracy theory. the only truth trust the people you love. the people who love you.', 'this doesn’t mean irrational paranoid come with crazy theories.', 'this means practice being skeptic every day every issue.', 'practice skepticism. not paranoia.', '4. vulnerable getting shut down', knew there were millions questions wanted ask… but couldn’t.', asked anyway.', '“are you still involved the government?”', '“i can’t say that,” said.', '“well, which agency were you in?”', '“i can’t say.”', '“do people know it?”', '“yes, let’s just say it’s well-known letter agency.”', 'ask. get shut down. ask again.', 'when interview, don’t want harass people for answer. but sometimes you poke and prod from various directions while you build rapport, you can get the answer.', 'not this time.', '5. know what drives you', 'mr. started hacking when was military school.', 'everything was regimented:', 'wake up', 'first mess', 'solute the flag', 'go class', 'second mess', 'second class', 'change minutes', 'go sports', 'third mess', 'after third mess, hours study hall, one hour free time', 'go sleep', 'do all over again', 'the school isolated. and the students can’t leave campus.', 'the only way mr. could talk girls was found them online. “we were heavily confined,” said.', 'but kept hitting firewalls.', 'so started hacking. learned everything could. not because wanted “attack” websites. but because didn’t want alone.', 'always let the prison walls around you create your opportunities.', 'censorship created his curiosity.', 'what frustrates you that can kickstart your curiosity.', '6. learn your patterns', 'mr. helped find one the most well known serial killers recent years and put him behind bars for life.', 'mr. was paid find patterns. watched terrorists. the example: burn phone.” this what criminals use cover their call history. they buy cheap phone. call few people, throw away and buy new one.', 'so mr. wrote software.', 'someone calls you, then you call 3–4 people. those 3–4 people call 3–4 more people. it’s tree calling. and they follow the branches then can find the roots.', 'he analyzed the trees one billion phone calls day. had access all our calls.', '“eventually, you realize that bunch random numbers keep calling the same person that all those random numbers are the same guy,” mr. said.', 'people are patterns. those patterns become your fingerprint.', 'he used that fingerprint identify notorious serial killer. used gps track him down. now the guy jail.', 'he used those fingerprints track terrorists. “there were lot attacks stopped.”', '7. interests precede education', 'he wasn’t educated about hacking even computers. but was passionate about and learned everything could.', '“i found something was interested in… and that was the best education ever received.”', 'find interest. list every day the things you were interested kid. it’s never too late learn now.', 'the one who loves what does will always learn faster and better than the person who doesn’t love it.', 'the one love will compete better against the one who doesn’t.', 'the one love will be…happier.', '8. trust the invisible', '“you were saving lives,” said.', '“no, wouldn’t say that.”', 'but insisted. because feel all have invisible threads impact. help and hurt people ways don’t know.', 'we all have our special abilities. and abilities help and hurt without realizing. always healthy enough know the difference.', 'mr. got married. loves his family. loves his work. “some partners never escaped the mindset wer were programmed with.”', 'reach for the positive when trapped negative.', 'love someone.', '9. choose your own net worth', 'mr. measures his net worth not dollars, not accomplishments promotions. “my net worth now data,” said.', 'he comes from hacker culture where the core belief that information should free.', 'too often, accept what’s been given us. “the rules” were told live by. the standards were set for us…', 'but mr. proved you can set your own standards. you can choose the measurement your net worth. rich relationships, rich people, rich joy, rich knowledge…', '10. learn everything you can', 'mr. found pattern his own life. realized loved hacking. and loved detecting patterns. got the same joy from both.', 'so started reading books… and learned everything could about computers, code, internet, backdoors and on.', 'he used those abilities fight wars. then help law enforcement track down criminals. and then build massive companies that sold.', met mr. with his wife and daughters recently. had never seen him happy.', 'sometimes the best pattern the smile your daughter. least think so.', 'james altucher the author the bestselling book choose yourself, editor the altucher report and host the popular podcast, the james altucher show which takes you beyond business and entrepreneurship exploring what means human and achieve well-being world that increasingly complicated. join the 136,000 readers getting dose best and controversial content. join here.']
'there’s reason you don’t see black folks the primary suspects committing domestic terrorism: black people have too many people relying and too much lose the shit that white domestic terrorists do. alternatively, when consider our own histories simultaneously have nothing lose. seriously, white folks need talk their people about this shit. the steadily increasing rate white domestic terrorism should not just frightening for those who have historically been marginalized, should scare white folks well. state fear anger not enough, but sometimes can push toward taking necessary action, and action can take many forms. won’t get anywhere keep coddling white feelings.', 'the legacy white domestic terrorism begins with the broader colonialism and imperialism committed all throughout the world, expands with hate groups like the klux klan, and narrows down individuals (the “lone wolf”) small groups like the unabomber (1980s-1990s), those who committed the columbine massacre (1990), the charleston massacre shooter (2015), the planned parenthood shooter (2015), and more recently the portland islamophobe (2017). and add it, all this only fueled further the so-called “alt right,” the renewed white nationalist and white supremacist movements led and his merry bandits.', '“black people have too many people relying and too much lose the shit that white domestic terrorists do.”', 'what black kids do? misdemeanors? yes. definitely.', 'drug related crimes? yes. definitely.', 'violent crime? yes. definitely.', 'the difference that while black folks and whites use drugs similar rates, black folks are disproportionately caught, punished, and sentenced. even the reporting and research whites more sympathetic, discussing “economic anxiety” justification for racism “sea despair” that must solved, opposed many times the united states government willingly lied about drug use among black folks. their own words (don’t skip past this quote):', '“the nixon campaign 1968, and the nixon white house after that, had two enemies: the antiwar left and black people. you understand what i’m saying? knew couldn’t make illegal either against the war black, but getting the public associate the hippies with marijuana and blacks with heroin, and then criminalizing both heavily, could disrupt those communities. could arrest their leaders, raid their homes, break their meetings, and vilify them night after night the evening news. did know were lying about the drugs? course did.”', 'the history black folks committing crimes like robbery, theft, and even and what some folks like call “black-on-black” crime misnomer, crime most commonly intraracial often related economic fights over resources. this not excuse what classify “crime,” the category itself requires much interrogation. for example, not paying money bail crime punishable jail time, essentially criminalizing poverty. need reconsider and decolonize our understanding what crime is, what the sources are, and why folks commit crimes.', 'we need think about why gang member would shoot rival gang member over something that could seen small. our judgement around theft, particularly when for basic needs for oneself one’s children, requires new perspective. how are people pushed into crime? what alternative opportunities they have? how does gentrification and housing displacement fuel poverty, violent crime, theft, and houselessness?', 'black youth need therapy, but they need for whole different reason than some these white kids sippin’ the wine white supremacy do. most, not all, black americans deal with general anxiety disorder and many deal with ptsd. pulling off the stunts white folks pull requires comfortability, friend joel writes, “it takes immense amount privilege and security function vacuum.”', '“the steadily increasing rate white domestic terrorism should not just frightening for those who have historically been marginalized, should scare white folks well.”', 'i’m psychologist, but seems that folks like the charleston shooter seek martyr even vanguard status show that they will not let “their women” taken black men, that they will longer stand folks ruin “their country.” cursory examination white domestic terrorism the u.s. reveals that often not rooted need food, shelter, water but instead violent ideologies that not help them, but instead hurt others.', 'in comparison, black american person would rarely attempt the sorts feats white american domestic terrorists successfully achieve for many reasons. the primary reason, assessment, that are afraid becoming the next modern day lynching. black queer man wept for orlando, and that same black queer man broke down followed the case sandra bland, even after learning about her homophobia. other words, why the fuck would black person gonna even attempt any these stunts when know that the police kill for everything from hand turning signal.', 'whiteness works shield that works across all economic classes embolden the spectrum white humans from dirt poor mega rich. class shifts the way whiteness experienced, “trailer trash” white person not the same wealthy white capitalist. they not possess the same opportunities socialization, but they still maintain the white entitlement that leads dangerous consequences. that how whiteness protects both the “redneck” and the proud bourgeois alike, giving them sense unearned security. it’s wild that white folks have everything their fingertips and yet they still hunt down ethnic, sexual, and religious minorities. shoplift, not for necessity, but for the thrill it.', 'black folks and many more historically marginalized groups across the entire globe have lot angry about, but are often remain quiet. but doesn’t matter there 1,000: there are number white folks that truly want exterminate non-white, non-straight, non-cis gender, non-american, and/or non-christian folks for merely existing. this should not just concern black folks america, but everyone. needless say: are tired.']
'along the course writing this essay amazon’s new series them: covenant which intended recount deep history with horror films and how jaws ruined for life duante wright was killed police brooklyn center, minnesota. shortly thereafter, body cam footage from the march shooting 13-year-old adam toledo chicago hit the internet.', 'as write this, black america reeling, the bodies our people shoved through systemic machine that churns out stacks black victims. hadn’t even gotten the hashtag part one killing before are faced with the gruesome visage dying child, shot while surrendering. and the midst this collective grief and anger that can think better example why one should engage with them.', 'the horror drama series was suspicious prospect from the start: the story already traumatized black family moving into white enclave, beset upon every corner society and the very ground their home rests on. it’s rollercoaster ride grief and gut punches with reprieve, each episode compounding the violence racism escalating beats frustrating and exhausting anti-climax that surely would’ve ended even more horror allowed run minute more.', 'the racialized violence them like watching the opening-bid stage spades game. one player asks, “how many books you got? because got redlining, rape, and ptsd right here,” only have their partner double down. “well, can stack that ptsd with government experimentation, then some infanticide, minstrelsy, and body horror,” they say. and then they proceed run boston.', 'creator/writer little marvin record suggesting all this trauma win for the culture, that all the black people never got see horror films are compensated for them stress-testing black nuclear family into physical and psychic annihilation. lifelong fan horror, have ask: how many black people were actually asking murdered horror films, exactly? when jordan peele made similar comment during the marketing for get out, made clear that while wondered where all the black people horror films were, wasn’t suggesting wished we’d die more, and his body work date reflects that. his black characters are tragic figures, but they ascend. they behave like real people, and because they’re black, they use all the advice we’ve shouted movie screens for generations and survive.', need everyone behind the curtain them understand that wanted traumatized for hours, already have america watch.', 'marvin doesn’t bother striving for such lofty goals. he’s seemingly interested only black representation horror, regardless the effect outcome. there sense common otherwise the actions the protagonists. the family moves into the last neighborhood they should, engages neighbors ways that would’ve gotten them killed real life, and even terrorizes one another the formula requires. the end, the black characters behave like white people horror films, making them the justice clarence thomas horror films.', 'as scroll media feeds right now, inundated actual stories racialized terror, and last week maddeningly so. and when consider how many these stories come days weeks after the killing moment, i’m reminded that some version this happening somewhere every day america: some black family still being run out their home. some black person driven despair every day the unbridled racism their workplace. some black child being purposefully undereducated teacher who sees and seals their fate foregone conclusion. because this reality, them feels like the fictionalized sections documentary racism. here how bad things used be, the shows suggest. but who didn’t know that? and why bother making period piece light the way things are?', 'the effort takes get black film, television series, book into the zeitgeist nearly insurmountable. because this, there’s contingent black people who believe that when you have problem with black art that makes through the machine, you should keep any negative criticism yourself. kenya barris confronted this belief head-on episode #blackaf, this idea that criticize such work makes harder for all black art get out the starting gate, let alone succeed. these admonishments frequently come from people who already work such industries and who want audiences know that it’s sometimes miracle that black work any kind gets through. need people like that understand that understand but disagree the cost–benefit analysis. want our work stand against the best work there because black artists create that level all the time but receive little the benefit glory. frankly, most what we’re competing against started with us. but i’d lying didn’t admit that i’d rather spent more time considering what we’re willing make it. i’d rather consider what aspects our existence are worth excavating for the purpose entertainment, black otherwise. assure you that platform large amazon, black people are not the primary audience consideration.)', 'there’s reason why the criticism about trauma black art keeps coming up: because it’s real. representation case you can only make for long before need consider the effects that representation. black art does not exist vacuum. representation truly worthy goal, should able speak the nature the representation, its subject. and need everyone behind the curtain them understand that wanted traumatized for hours, already have america watch.', 'let clear: don’t want tell artists what create. artist, can tell you that the last thing i’d want someone telling what it’d almost assuredly have the opposite effect. but have able talk about when black art isn’t doing what its creators believe it’s doing, when the goal isn’t reading the room and may, fact, having deleterious effect. them not worth the trauma causes, and not worthy the pain mines.']
'america, got tell suck laying pipe.', 'our pipeline craftmanship garbage. these things break all the time. you know how know? fucking googled it.', 'there have been pipeline accidents 2016 far. there were 2015.', 'wherever pipeline gets installed, our government letting oil companies play roulette with american lives. every time one these things busts open, risks spilling gas, oil and jet fuel into our own fucking water supply.', 'and yesterday some guy accidentally hit one with fucking trackhoe and caused explosion massive put people the hospital.', 'america, know you seem think terrorism problem but have you considered how much terror these pipelines are running beneath our feet?', 'and for what? least terrorists think they have cause. what possible rationale there for let oil companies play pipeline roulette with the mississippi tributary system? america, allow our own wells poisoned handful assholes can get rich enough suck salmon roe off some kid’s ass bangkok.', 'oil companies executives are just useful idiots who get paid absurdly well run murder through the ground. where we’re talking about the dakota access pipeline particular, we’re talking about energy transfer. you’ll consider this invitation troll around its garbage site, you’ll see it’s basically shell corporation spongy for investment. exists make rich people richer. why, yes, course trump’s investor.', 'who else, though?', 'www.democracynow.org', 'amy goodman: how are the banks involved?', 'hugh macmillan: well, that’s they are banking this company and banking being able drill and frack for the oil send through the pipeline over the coming decades. they’re providing the capital for the construction this pipeline. well, i’ve got list the banks that are specifically providing financing for this project… citibank the bank that’s been running the books the project, and that’s the bank that beat the bushes and got other banks join in. so, have wells fargo, bnp paribas, suntrust, royal bank scotland, bank tokyo-mitsubishi, mizuho bank, securities, abn amro capital, dnb first bank and that’s actually bank based philly; it’s not the dnb bank based norway, which actually provided several hundred million the energy transfer family separately and icbc london, smbc nikko securities and société générale.', 'right, know investment banks know running murder through the ground going continue generate return investment for decades come. fact, they’re literally wait for banking it.', 'so guarantee the murdersauce never stops flowing, oil companies and their executives pay off other useful idiots like north dakota governor jack dalrymple huge campaign contributions. and not missing his chance get his dick this circlejerk, governor jack dalrymple buys stock the oil companies.', 'why give fuck when you get paid not give fuck? that’s how dalrymple rolls.', 'that’s how america rolls.', 'heads up, though, because these things are shit and break all the time.', 'only matter time.', 'tick tock.']
what know happened. 5pm tuesday, man began shooting people massage parlour. less than hour later, went another one, and began shoot even more people. while the police went that location, across the street, yet another massage parlour, another person was shot. the final tally? eight.', 'horrific. and yet there are many twisted layers hate and violence here, it’s hard even begin know where unpack them. let’s continue with what happened next.', 'the mayor atlanta got and said: motive still not clear.” the police chief, appearing sympathise with the gunman, said: “he was sex addict” and “he had bad day.” wait, what? motive isn’t clear? was sex addict? had bad day?', 'let put like this. america’s normalised fascist terrorism.', 'if man travels across city, targeting and shooting women, that more than enough for hate crime. misogynist violence. but what happened here even worse than that.', man certain kind travelled across city shooting women certain kind and anyone else unfortunate enough alongside them. asian women. and not even just asian women. asian women working massage parlours.', 'massage parlours america are course notorious hotbeds human trafficking. you’re dude, you might about object that. ahead and ask yourself: would you really want your wife daughter niece work massage parlour? didn’t think so. women work such jobs, often, because they have to. they might even defend having work such jobs, that’s true, and their limited circumstances, working such jobs might feel like relative freedom. but nobody should have work job that right the edge degradation.', 'does that mean that all body-work massages and the like are degrading? course not. but does mean that when there such thing exploitation and degradation, and intersects altogether too neatly with race, class, ethnicity, and profession.', 'the women that this man targeted literally with bullets were, other words, some the most dispossessed and degraded and exploited figures american culture. women who are barely considered women all. asian women the edges “sex work,” euphemistically call these days, selling your body just like, don’t know, being teacher hedge fund manager. course, it’s not and you are forced into it, like many women are, leaves lasting scars and serious trauma behind it.', 'think about american culture for second. how are asian women portrayed? well, usually, they’re not. the leading woman the stereotype usually blonde, thin, and petite. maybe brunette, culture industry trying edgy. these days, once while, it’s black lady and that’s real progress. but asians? they’re relegated the sidelines. asian men are considered effective castrati without the masculine qualities play the stereotypical american hero. and asian women are bigger problem entirely. what are they? they are left hold all the racist baggage still assigned asians. they’re “bitchy” and “inscrutable,” they’re “smart” and “pushy,” they’re “sexy” and little bit “spicy.” what the? how person…spicy?', 'now let’s come the alleged killer. was, you might expect, white dude. given the track record white dudes america, he’s probably going found trump sympathiser and fox news watcher and all the rest that’s just simple statistics.', 'white american men live culture extreme entitlement. their culture says that everything owed them. everything. job, money, career, upward mobility, fine house, cars put the garage. and women’s bodies.', 'when white men america don’t have these things, they lash out rage. course, that culture goes well beyond america. alek minassian killed women toronto because his thwarted entitlement ended explosion rage. jesse kempson killed grace millane new zealand, after raping former tinder date and abusing his partner.', 'still, canada and new zealand are cultures which have made far, far more progress against both misogyny and racism than america has. again, that’s just simple statistics, from women’s participation politics, gender pay gaps, incidences abuse, minorities imprisoned. america is, very long way, the most misogynistic and racist society the rich world. and before you doubt me, ahead and remind again how many days it’s been since donald trump’s been out office and what his attitudes towards women and minorities were.', 'they were hateful. they were fascist. what does the fascist mind believe? hierarchy personhood. the top sit certain kind people, then other below them. and the threshold personhood crossed sit, finally, still others. the trumpist mind, this hierarchy personhood easy deduce because america’s nazis speak openly, the foundation the kind society they want build. the top come “pure blooded” white men, then below them, “pure blooded” white women, below them, the “mixed races,”again, order gender. finally, the threshold personhood crossed come the minorities black people, latinos, hispanics, asians. they are not considered people all. and women are even less than men.', 'in american society, there worse place than minority woman woman colour, americans put it. that’s not opinion, again, it’s just statistics. women colour suffer the worst outcomes america, very long way, whether they’re economic, cultural, social, emotional. even where they are seen “economically successful,” like asians are perceived be, that stereotype only exists hide dark underbelly and underworld exploitation and degradation poverty, exclusion, abuse, and trauma.', 'like the asian women who work “massage parlors.” imagine what happens when they for interview nice and fine companies and corporations, hoping work offices, where bodily violence isn’t fact everyday life, least less so. all those companies and corporations are still run white dudes. and those asian women probably get polite, vacant stares, and are told they’re “not good fit” they “don’t match the culture” and on.', 'that’s true, they don’t. but only because american culture incredibly racist and misogynistic. and before you argue about that, consider, again that asian women were just killed for being asian women.', 'now let’s come back the shooter. let’s imagine the mindset hypothetical shooter committing this kind crime. no, that’s not unfair that’s the job any civilized person. was just garden variety misogynist, wouldn’t shooting women. he’d home wanking off pics women couldn’t “have,” calling himself incel, and crying tears rage when was finished. was just step from that violent misogynist he’d have found few women his own brutalise, trapping them, maybe, abusive relationships. was one step from that misogynistic killer then he’d have had much easier time killing white women. after all, there are whole lot more them the south than there are asian women.', 'this man who seems have gone out his way kill certain type person. asian women. because, obviously, hated them. what does tell when someone hates another kind person enough kill not just one them, but many them? that they not consider this group people human beings. they probably consider them “lower” down the fictional hierarchy personhood they’ve internalised than their dog cat. they hate them because they see them dangerous and sinister beings who have taken away what they are entitled to. this case, the white male entitlement access women’s bodies.', 'sadly, terribly, and predictably enough, for this man, exploiting women objects sexualised hate only led his self-hate increase. the logic simple. every time engaged the transaction exploitation, was confirming his belief that wasn’t worthy social relationship with woman, consensual one, just economic one, and that even women who weren’t people didn’t consider him therefore man. you can see how his rage escalated breaking point. and yet that’s not legitimise justify it. explain how american ideals masculinity are toxic they are literally fascist.', 'it’s hard, least for many americans, wrap your head around, after all, the idea “women who aren’t even considered people.” but that what america teaches its men the epitome and essence patriarchal violence that women aren’t considered people all, but “second caste” beauvoir wrote about. and when you consider women unpeople then it’s all that much easier violence them, beginning with the most powerless and vulnerable all.', 'now let’s come the bizarre justifications. the gunman was “sex addict.” lol. you see sex addicts going out after every meeting and shooting the nearest bar? strip club? brothel? didn’t think so. it’s wash. sex addiction doesn’t justify mass murder. doesn’t even begin remotely explain it.', 'it’s wash, too, the idea that “we don’t know what motivated these crimes.” sure do. out and kill certain type person, over and over again, then it’s pretty obvious i’m racist. what else could possibly prove it? out way kill women that i’ve already been subjugating, it’s pretty clear i’m misogynist. what else could possibly prove it?', 'the defences already emerging for the gunman only reveal how broken american culture is. being defended, but none the people defending him are his lawyer. they’re the ones the mayor, the police chief, and who are supposed keeping people safe from violence, for pete’s sake.', 'what you see all that, all those layers hate and violence, twisted themselves they can barely picked apart?', see society that has normalised fascist violence. women are not really considered people america yet which why, say, passing equal rights bills still something that’s contentious and “controversial.” minorities are barely people, either you only need look the trumpists for evidence that. put them both together, and you have powder keg waiting explode.', 'the mentality white masculinity america teaches men they’re entitled everything money, power, sex, women’s bodies. and furthermore, they’re entitled explode rage and violence their expectations aren’t met. american men are socialised into that belief system early, and often, from grade school, high school sports and its open misogyny, “frats” and their brutality and stupidity, the way sexual harassment regular feature working life, and abuse regular feature relationships.', 'men are taught entitled everything, from power over other men who are more feminine, women’s bodies and when they don’t get it, they’re taught entitled violence and rage.', 'but all that just fascism, restated. fascism’s the internalised hierarchy personhood. and when men are taught they’re entitled power over everything and everyone else, from minorities women’s bodies, that all the opportunities and chances and possibilities society belong them and it’s explode rage and violence they don’t get then that just another way install people with fascist belief system. not just men, should said, but also women and minorities who accept their place this grim and foolish ladder personhood and power.', 'the atlanta shootings are troubling because many, many people died. but think they are troubling, too, for deeper reason. many people died example fascist violence. male entitlement erupting into mass murder. racist, misogynist mass murder.', 'it’s difficult say that’s not fascism. and that america still has much trouble comprehending, understanding, seeing, saying that the biggest giveaway all how normalised fascist violence fascist terrorism really is.', 'umairmarch 2021']
'if the definition genocide the deliberate killing large group people, especially those particular ethnic group nation then that certainly seems whats happening palestine.', 'after trump injected himself into the ‘middle east peace process’ naming jerusalem the capital israel, have some questions and observations.', should have formed more intelligent perspective whats going long time ago since the israeli-palestinian conflict has been going since before was born. and martin luther king jr. quoted saying “injustice anywhere threat justice everywhere. are caught inescapable network mutuality, tied single garment destiny. whatever affects one directly, affects all indirectly.”', 'the parallels between what israel seems doing palestine and what the united states did native americans scary.', 'so here the rundown: way back 1918 after the end world war europeans led the british carved the middle east according their wishes. great britain was committed creating what then foreign secretary arthur balfour called ‘national home’ for the jews place palestine. april 1920, the newly formed league nations (and future united nations) handed britain mandate govern palestine.', 'world war gave them the chance make that happen answer what with all europe’s displaced jews. 1948, general assembly resolution 181 divided palestine and gave territory israeli jews and balfour’s vision became reality.', 'the palestinians were obviously pissed and immediately waged war.', 'but the palestinians were underfunded and outgunned. the rest the arab world could not (or would not since they were under european control) organize substantial support for their embattled compatriots. israel, the other hand, sent agents europe and the united states and raised $129 million dollars (about $2.4 billion todays dollars) from 1947 1949.', 'the results were pretty predictable.', 'palestine was beaten, israel held the mandated territory, and about 100,000 palestinian refugees fled with hopes returning when things settled down. from places like jordan and lebanon, these palestinians planned and attempted insurgencies with little success. meanwhile, the the jewish population had increased from 83,790 before the occupation more than half million.', 'other arab nations formed military blockades around israel try contain them, but 1967 israel launched sneak attack egypt, jordan, syria, lebanon, iraq, and course palestine. everyone was caught off guard. israel suffered just few thousand casualties while the arab forces lost more than 20,000, along with the entire egyptian air force and key land masses.', 'in just days the war was over and the israeli’s took control east jerusalem .', 'and here are today.', 'after trump injected himself into the ‘middle east peace process’ naming jerusalem the capital israel, have some questions and observations.', 'so let get this straight:', 'someone dont know gives someone else dont know part house have owned for thousands years. when they try force their way in, attack them. they beat me, force into the basement, and then sneak attack take over that part the house too. then they give cot and beat every now and then when complain.', 'does that sound about right?', 'ok. cool. well now have some questions.', 'so far looks like israel has everything wants. plenty land. leaders the world kissing its ring. nukes. booming economy. why would israel want inflict more suffering palestine starving them out?', 'here what talking about:', 'during peace talks back 1993 called the oslo accords, negotiations resulted israel being obligated let palestinians fish nautical miles out from the coast.', 'yea. that never happened.', 'the widest range israel has allowed the past years nautical miles, and times, the limit was reduced one nautical mile', 'that meant less food for the palestinians.', 'combine that fact with the ever shrinking amount arable land, and you have people the brink starvation.', 'between 1995 and 2014, arable land share land area palestine was decreasing average 1.37 each year, although before that, grew from 16.6 1965 18.4 1995.', 'so you cant fish. you cant farm. and the roads are all controlled your enemies. you might find yourself throwing rocks, too.', 'just yesterday israeli sniper killed well-known palestinian protester who had legs, weapons, and was wheelchair. died from single gunshot the head.', 'maybe misinformed about how snipers work, but dont snipers use scopes aquire targets? wouldn’t that mean this sniper would have known was about shoot unarmed man wheelchair?', 'one palestinian child has been killed every days israel for years', "of course the sniper knew. and didn't give damned. murdering civilians part strategy that the israelis call ‘cutting the grass’. during the oslo accords was agreed that the israeli military would leave palestine, but twenty years later israel still has permanent military presence more than 80% the west bank.", 'from these permanent positions, israelis have killed palestinians for infractions that range from throwing rocks (gasp!) carrying palestinian flags.', 'some israeli strikes target members hamas supposed terrorist group that lobs rockets across the border. but most the attacks seem arbitrary: local office estimated that percent people killed gaza are civilians.', 'even worse, there seems limit who israelis would kill the oldest known victim was year old woman, and the youngest was month old child. one palestinian child killed every days israel for years.', 'israel gets away with these crimes against humanity scott free. defense for children international palestine (dcip) points out, “accountability for shootings [of palestinian children] israeli forces extremely rare. only one incident since 2014 has resulted indictment.”', 'the group’s accountability program director ayed abu eqtaish stated: “intentional lethal force now appears routinely used israeli forces, even unjustified situations, with accountability, putting more and more children risk.”', 'so palestine cant fight back. they have military. they are too hungry sustain long term operations. and the rest the middle east busy dealing with metric f-ton other problems. palestine’s only other option appealing the humanity the rest the world.', 'so the boycott, divestment, sanctions (bds) movement and similar organizations were created pressure israel stop starving and killing palestinians. they used both traditional and social media and public discourse get the word out.', 'so far, those pleas have fallen hard hearts and deaf ears. you might remember when the governor new york came out left field with this announcement:', '“today, i’m going sign executive order that says very clearly, are against the bds movement, and it’s very simple. you boycott against israel, new york will boycott you. you divert revenues from israel, new york will divert revenues from you. you sanction israel, new york will sanction you, period.” governor andrew cuomo new york. 2016', 'universities long hailed bastions free speech have shut down any activism the part palestine.', 'if the world all about ‘two-state solution’, why only one state allowed speak?', not asking questions because anti-semetic. the modus operandi zionists seem silence critics with baby hitler labels. asking questions because when babies are being killed then everyone should asking questions.']
riting for the guardian for over year, contract was unilaterally terminated because wrote piece gaza that was beyond the pale. doing so, the guardian breached the very editorial freedom the paper was obligated protect under contract. i’m speaking out because believe the public interest know how pulitizer prize-winning newspaper which styles itself the world’s leading liberal voice, casually engaged act censorship shut down coverage issues that undermined israel’s publicised rationale for going war.', joined the guardian environment blogger april 2013. prior this, had been author, academic and freelance journalist for over decade, writing for the independent, independent sunday, sydney morning herald, the age, the scotsman, foreign policy, the atlantic, quartz, prospect, new statesman, monde diplomatique, among others.', 'on 9th july 2014, posted article via earth insight blog the guardian’s environment website, exposing the role palestinian resources, specifically gaza’s off-shore natural gas reserves, partly motivating israel’s invasion gaza aka ‘operation protective edge.’ among the sources referred was policy paper written incumbent israeli defence minister moshe ya’alon one year before operation cast lead, underscoring that the palestinians could never allowed develop their own energy resources any revenues would supporting palestinian terrorism.', 'the article now has 68,000 social media shares, and far the single most popular article the gaza conflict date. contrary the conventional wisdom, israel has seen control gaza’s gas major strategic priority over the last decade for three main reasons.', 'firstly, israel faces near-term gas crisis largely due the long lead time needed bring israel’s considerable domestic gas resources into production; secondly, netanyahu’s administration cannot stomach any scenario which hamas-run palestinian administration accesses and develops their own resources; thirdly, israel wants use palestinian gas strategic bridge cement deals with arab dictatorships whose domestic populations oppose signing deals with israel.', 'either way, the biggest obstacle israel accessing gaza’s gas the hamas-run administration the strip, which rejects all previous agreements that israel had pursued develop the gas with the british gas group and the palestinian authority.', 'since 2006, the guardian has loudly trumpeted its aim the world’s leading liberal voice. for years, the paper has sponsored the annual index censorship’s prestigious freedom expression award. the paper won the pulitzer prize for its reporting the national security agency (nsa). generally, the newspaper goes out its way dress itself standing the forefront fighting censorship, particularly the media landscape. this why its approach gaza gas story disturbing.', 'the day after posting it, received phone call from james randerson, assistant national news editor. sounded riled and rushed. without beating around the bush, james told point blank that guardian blog was immediately discontinued. not because article was incorrect, factually flawed, outrageously defamatory. not because i’d somehow breached journalistic ethics, violated contract. no. the gaza gas piece, said, was “not environment story,” and therefore was “inappropriate post” for the guardian’s environment website:', '“you’re writing too many non-environment stories, i’m afraid just don’t have any other option. this article doesn’t belong the environment site. should really cif [i.e. the guardian’s online opinion section known ‘comment free’].”', was shocked, and more than little baffled. you can read guardian profile, remit was cover “the geopolitics environmental, energy and economic crises.” that was what was commissioned indeed, when had applied late 2012 blog for the guardian, earlier piece i’d written the link between israeli military operations and gaza’s gas monde diplomatique was part portfolio.', 'so suggested james that termination was somewhat overreaction. perhaps could simply have meeting discuss the editorial issues and work out together what remit should be. “i’d happy cooperate much possible,” said. didn’t want lose contract. james refused point blank, instead telling that “interests are increasingly about issues that don’t think are good fit for what want see published the environment site.”', 'in the end, polite protestations got nowhere. within the hour, received email from rights manager the guardian informing that they had terminated contract.', 'under that contract, however, had editorial control over what wrote blog obviously within the remit that had been commissioned for. from may april, environment bloggers underwent training and supervision ensure that would eventually speed post the site independently based our own editorial judgement. the terms and conditions signed under our contract state:', '“you shall regularly maintain your blog and shall determine its content. you shall launch your own posts which shall not sub-edited gnm. gnm occasionally might raise topics interest with you suitable for your blog but you shall under obligation include cover such topics.”', 'the terms also point out that termination the contract with immediate effect could only occur “if the other party commits material breach any its obligations under this agreement which not capable remedy”; “the other party has committed material breach any its obligations under this agreement which capable remedy but which has not been remedied within period thirty (30) days following receipt written notice so.”', 'the problem that had committed breach any contractual obligations. the contrary, the guardian had breached its contractual obligation regarding freedom determine the contents blog, simply because didn’t like what wrote. this censorship.', 'as the index censorship points out, the “absence direct state-sponsored, highly visible censorship, which prevails many countries around the world, may contribute the commonly held view that there censorship this country and that not problem.” however, “contemporary censorship, which sits within liberal democracy” can come “in many different forms, both direct and indirect, some more subtle, some more overt.”', 'ironically, few days later, was contacted the editor the ecologist one the world’s premier environment magazines who wanted re-print gaza gas story. after publishing updated version guardian piece, the ecologist also published in-depth follow response objections printed the national interest (ironically authored contractor working for oil company invested offshore gas reserves overlapping the gaza marine). obviously, having been expelled the guardian, could not respond via blog would normally have done.', 'that follow-up drew range public record sources including leading business and financial publications, well official british foreign office (fco) documents obtained under freedom information. the latter confirmed that despite massive domestic gas discoveries israel’s own territorial waters, the inability kick-start production due host bureaucratic, technological, logistical and regulatory issues not mention real uncertainties quantities commercially exploitable resources meant that israel could face gas supply challenges early next year. israel’s own gas fields would probably not brought into production until around 2018-2020. israeli officials, according the fco, saw the 1.4 trillion cubic meters gas gaza’s marine (along with other potential “additional resources” yet discovered according the energy information administration) cheap “stop-gap” that might sustain both israel’s domestic energy needs and its export ambitions until the tamar and leviathan fields could actually start producing.', 'by broaching such issues the guardian, though, seems had crossed some sort invisible barrier that this topic was simply off-limits.', 'to illustrate the sheer absurdity the guardian’s pretense that story about gaza’s gas resources “not legitimate environment story,” consider the fact that just weeks earlier, adam vaughan, the editor the guardian’s environment website, had personally assented posting the following story: ‘iraq blowback: isis rise manufactured insatiable oil addiction west’s co-optation gulf states’ jihadists created the neocon’s best friend: islamist frankenstein.’', 'proposed headlines for stories that environment bloggers work are posted shared google spreadsheet that editors can keep track what we’re doing and planning publish. adam had seen proposed headline and requested see the draft the 16th june: would you mind sending this one preview, please, before publishing? just conscious it’s very sensitive subject,” wrote email.', sent him the full article with summary what was about. later the day, pinged him again find out what thought, and replied: “thanks, sorry, yes think it’s fine.”', 'so article about isis and oil addiction “fine,” but piece about israel, gaza and conflict over gas resources not. really? are offshore gas resources not part the environment? apparently, for the guardian, not palestine, where gaza’s environment has been bombed smithereens the idf.', 'meanwhile, the israel-gaza gas saga continues. just over week ago, ha’aretz carried some insightful updates the strategic value the whole thing. quoting ariel ezrahi, energy adviser quartet middle east envoy tony blair (the quartet representing the us, un, and russia), ha’aretz noted that there was reason why jordan which had recently signed agreement with israel purchase gas from its leviathan field had simultaneously announced that intended purchase gas from gaza. israel attempts reposition itself major gas exporter regional regimes like egypt and turkey, the biggest challenge that “it’s very hard for them sign gas contract with israel despite their desperate need,” due how unpopular such move would with their domestic populations.', '“if were israel’s prime minister,” blair’s energy adviser said, “i’d think how could help the neighboring countries extricate themselves from the jam, and israel closes the palestinian gas market, that’s not smart thing.” israel has find way open the palestinian gas market and integrate into the emerging complex israeli export deals: would wise for israel least consider the contribution the palestinian dimension these deals,” said ezrahi. think it’s mistake for israel rush into regional agreements without least considering the palestinian dimension and how can contribute israeli interests.”', 'israel, backed its allies the west, wants use the palestinians “as asset they strive join the regional power grid, and bridge the arab world,” selling palestinian “gas various markets,” promoting deal with the corporations developing israel’s “tamar and leviathan [fields] that will allow for the sale cheap gas the [palestinian] authority.”', 'but there further challenge when considering the palestinian dimension, namely hamas: can’t meet with people linked hamas,” said blair’s energy adviser. “it’s very firm ban dictated the quartet. [emphasis added] the americans don’t enter gaza either.” not just israel that has ruled out any gas deal with the palestinians involving hamas. have the us, eu, and russia.', 'but israel has mechanism eliminate hamas from the gaza strip except, far moshe ya’alon concerned, military action change facts the ground.', 'over the odd articles i’d written for the guardian, not single piece falls outside the subject matter had been commissioned write on: the geopolitics interconnected environment, energy and economic crises. the conclusion unavoidable: the guardian had simply decided that resource conflicts over the occupied territories should not receive coverage. should noted that before post, the paper had never before acknowledged link between idf military action and gaza’s gas. now that i’m gone, doubt will ever covered again.', 'well, least ya’alon, and his boss netanyahu, will happy.', 'not mention tony blair.', 'when began speaking confidence number other journalists inside and outside the guardian about what had happened me, they all consistently told that experience although particularly outrageous was not entirely unprecedented.', senior editor national british publication who has written frequently for the guardian’s opinion section, told that was aware that all coverage the israel-palestine issue was “tightly controlled” jonathan freedland, the guardian’s executive editor for opinion.', 'another journalist told that guardian editor commissioned story from him discussing the suppression criticism israel public discourse and media, but that freedland rejected the story without even reviewing draft.', 'several other journalists spoke inside and outside the guardian went far describe freedland the newspaper’s unofficial ‘gatekeeper’ the middle east conflict, and that invariably leaned toward pro-israel slant.', 'these anecdotes have been publicly corroborated jonathan cook, former middle east staff reporter, foreign editor and columnist for the guardian, who currently based nazareth where has won several awards for his reporting. profile cook the progressive jewish news site mondoweiss points out that key turning point cook’s career occurred 2001 when had just returned from israel, having conducted investigation into the murder non-violent arab protestors israeli police during the second intifada the year before.', 'the police, cook found, had executed “shoot-to-kill policy” against unarmed victims was eventually confirmed government inquiry. but the guardian suppressed his investigation, and chose not run all. cook says that while the paper does contain some exemplary reporting and insights, and even goes out its way condemn the occupation, there are certain lines that simply cannot crossed, such questioning israel’s capacity define itself simultaneously exclusively jewish and democratic state, critiquing aspects its security doctrine.', 'cook’s scathing criticism his former paper 2011 counterpunch article highly revealing, and relevant, for understanding what happened me:', '“the guardian, like other mainstream media, heavily invested both financially and ideologically supporting the current global order. was once able exclude and now, the internet age, must vilify those elements the left whose ideas risk questioning system corporate power and control which the guardian key institution.', 'the paper’s role, like that its rightwing cousins, limit the imaginative horizons readers. while there just enough leftwing debate make readers believe their paper pluralistic, the kind radical perspectives needed question the very foundations which the system western dominance rests either unavailable ridiculed.”', 'last month, cook highlighted ongoing subtle but powerful insensitivities language employed the guardian coverage’s the gaza crisis which, effect, served “disappear” the palestinians. specifically identified freedland major player this phenomenon. “the guardian’s pride” having helped create israel “still palpable the paper (as know from years there),” especially among certain senior editors there “who influence much the conflict’s coverage yes, that reference jonathan freedland, among others.”', '===', 'update 4th dec 2014 (10.13am): jonathan freedland has offered response this morning via twitlonger, follows:', '“your piece for medium implies was involved the end your arrangement with the guardian. don’t wish rude, but had literally not heard you your work till seeing that medium piece, via twitter, few hours ago. (the guardian environment website, where you wrote, edited separately from the guardian’s comment free site, which now oversee.) had idea you wrote for the guardian, idea that arrangement had been terminated and not the slightest knowledge your piece gaza’s gas until few hours ago. what’s more, was abroad vacation the days july you describe. put starkly, involvement your case was precisely zero. hope that matter your own journalistic integrity, you’ll want alter the medium piece reflect these facts. perhaps you’ll also share this twitter widely you shared the medium piece yesterday.”', 'however, freedland’s reading this piece incorrect. not implying that freedland was “involved” the end guardian tenure. have clue about that, and sure, did not make any such claim above.', 'my simple point that experience egregious guardian censorship over the gaza gas story which freedland does not address beyond denying his involvement has long and little-known context, suggesting that rather than experience being mere bizarre and accidental aberration, part entrenched, wider culture across the paper which freedland himself has allegedly played key role fostering.', 'it not fault that the range journalists spoke all described freedland the guardian’s resident unofficial “gatekeeper” israel-palestine coverage. notably, freedland fails address their allegations that has previously quashed stories which are critical israel ideological grounds rather than reasons ‘journalistic integrity.’', 'end', '===', 'this perhaps not entirely surprising. book commissioned the guardian, disenchantment: the guardian and israel, daphna baram, documents clearly the connection between the newspaper and zionism, noting for instance that guardian editor scott had been central the negotiations with the british government resulting the balfour declaration and the very conception the state israel. her conclusion that despite becoming increasingly critical the occupation after 1967, the guardian remains staunchly pro-zionist, its staff devoting “inordinate time and effort” ensure “fairness israel.”', 'the guardian, quite rightly, has reputation for breaking some the most important news stories the decade among them, course, playing lead role releasing edward snowden’s revelations about mass surveillance and related violations civil liberties. yet hidden the cracks this coverage the fact that while disclosing critical facts, the guardian has been unable raise the most fundamental and probing questions about the purpose and direction mass surveillance, why has accelerated, what motivates it, and who benefits from it.', 'questions must therefore asked why newspaper that sees itself the global media’s bastion liberalism, has engaged such grievous censorship shutting down coverage environmental geopolitics phenomenon which increasingly the heart not just conflict over the occupied territories, but the chaos world affairs the 21st century.', 'if this the state the guardian, undoubtedly one the better newspapers, then clearly have serious problem with the media. ultimately, mainstream media remains under the undue influence powerful special interests, whether financial, corporate ideological.', 'given the scale the converging crises face terms climate change, energy volatility, financial crisis, rampant inequality, proliferating species extinctions, insane ocean acidification, food crisis, foreign policy militarism, and the rise the police-state and given the bankruptcy much the media illuminating the real causes these crises and their potential solutions, need new reliable and accountable sources news and information.', 'we need new media, and need now.', 'as print newspapers increasingly into decline, the opportunity for new people-powered models independent digital media rising exponentially. that’s why i’ve launched crowdfunder help support journalism, and move toward creating new investigative journalism collective that operates the public interest, precisely because funded not corporations ideologues, but people. can create new journalism platforms that are dependent for their survival citizens themselves, then the interests citizens that those platforms will function. until then, fearless, adversarial investigative journalism will always danger being shut down compromised.', believe that together, can create new people-powered model journalism that will make the old, hierarchical media conglomerates dominated special interests and parochial paternalistic visions the world obsolete. so, you like, pop along patreon.com crowdfunder for insurge intelligence, truly independent people-powered investigative journalism collective that will remain dedicated breaking the big stories that matter, matter what. pledge little much you like, and join the coming media revolution☺', 'dr nafeez ahmed investigative journalist, bestselling author and international security scholar. formerly the guardian, writes the ‘system shift’ column for vice’s motherboard, and the winner 2015 project censored award for outstanding investigative journalism for his guardian work. the author user’s guide the crisis civilization: and how save (2010), and the scifi thriller novel zero point, among other books.']
'update: lana has cancelled her show!', 'preface: don’t write this with any ill will towards lana del rey, but from position sadness that artists, who have been historically instrumental challenging the status quo are pressured one way another ignore their unique super powers. the powers gravitate towards are not their voices, their talent playing instruments their composition music, but their deep, natural sense empathy.', 'this weekend, response news that lana del rey will the biggest star performing israel’s meteor festival, young fans from around the world, including palestinians, began urge the american artist skip the concert using the hashtag #lanadontgo. fans cited the increasingly influential movement boycott israel into accountability for human rights violations and the brand new nation-state law that enshrines its long and rapidly increasing and unapologetic actions. these actions resemble south african apartheid and the jim crow south, both which were ended using boycotts.', 'the demand reached its peak sunday, after lana tweeted about former new york city mayor rudolph giuliani’s claiming that “the truth isn’t the truth” when questioned about investigation his client, donald trump. what was expected the usual support young fans show artists when they call out trump, turned instead into opportunity address the actual truths state violence against palestinians west bank only minutes away from the concert and seconds from palestinians, other arabs, druze and africans all through tel aviv.', 'in response the blowback, lana crafted statement about her decision play israel.', 'her full statement below with comments.', '“on the topic ‘truth’ (my earlier tweet that references statement made giuliani about trump today) understand many are upset that we’re going tel aviv for the meteor festival, understand your concern really get do.”', 'lana here introduces “we” rather than “i”, helping diffuse her influence and responsibility for the decisions she makes. i’m sure many people are involved, but i’m also sure lana del rey has enough agency with lana del rey follow her lead.', '“what can tell you believe music universal and should used brings together. signed the show the intention that would performed for the kids there and plan was for done loving energy thematic emphasis peace.”', 'specifically, israeli kids. palestinian kids caged into west bank and gaza will not allowed attend. kids gaza and west bank, who are nearly 50% the population, are banned from travel. and 273 palestinian children young are held israeli prison. there nothing about this event that “universal” “brings together”. akin walking passed the black section the white section cafeteria sing songs about unity.', '“if you don’t agree with get it. see both sides.”', 'here where lana’s statement begins verge giuliani’s statement about truth. there aren’t two sides human rights. there only one absolute truth.', '“but and band have been performing all over the world for month out the years for close years now together. and we’re about travel place that many big bands are playing this and this festival.”', 'again have example diffusing responsibility. lana isn’t just another act long list artists, she the biggest selling, most successful artist the ticket with enormous power.', '“we don’t always agree with the politics the places play within even our own country- sometimes don’t even feel safe, depending how far abroad but travel- but are musicians and we’ve dedicated our lives being the road.”', 'politics are how much should pay taxes. college should debt free. human rights are not politics and pegging “we don’t always agree politics” doesn’t add up. you may disagree the politics cent refund the plastic bottle that holds water, but one wouldn’t put “we don’t always agree politics” before super power denying besieged community access drinking water which israel does collective punishment and literally fill pools and garden sprinklers illegal settlements.', '“so closing although have deep sentiments over what true not true, right wrong- would like remind you that performing tel aviv not political statement commitment the politics there”', 'lana here claims deep sentiments but has yet even introduce the word “palestinian” her statement. fact, her entire statement does not mention palestinians all. that political.', '“just singing here california doesn’t mean views are alignment current governments opinions sometimes inhuman actions.”', 'this comparing apples hummus.', 'had san diego defied the constitution and installed walls around people latinx background, starving them medical supplies, school supplies and their own fishing and drinking waters while occasionally bombing peaceful protests, assassinating unarmed nurses, and imprisoning poets for poetry, lana del ray would not playing san diego.', '“or that condone own president who openly mocked disabled people rallies (i’m not anyway likening the gravity certain travesties that have occured israel the current hardships we’re facing here)”', 'it’s very strange here that when you even attempt mention palestinians, you say israel.', '“i’m just stating that i’m simple singer,”', 'singers have spent generations and risked great harm their lives and the lives their families protest. they did not that because they thought they were not powerful, they did because they knew they were.', 'you are also poet, like palestinian poet dareen tatour who only few years older than you and has spent years house arrest for poetry, and now faces “terrorism” charges and prison for one she posted facebook.', '“i’m doing best navigate the waters the constant tumultuous hardships the war-torn countries all over the world that travel through monthly.”', 'germany and russia were war. the united states and japan were war. the palestinians are not war “war-torn”. they are occupied, ethnically cleansed from lands and their bodies, their water, their air and their food obliterated every single day.', 'in recent months alone, israel has not only erased the notion palestinian capitol moving its embassy, assassinating unarmed nurse, imprisoning children, and planning mass deportation black refugees referred officials and public opinion cancer” (one which israelis like sarah silverman’s sister, rabbi susan silverman, compared the holocaust and her actions hide africans those who hid anne frank), has enshrined these supremacist acts with law that removes arabic national language, and sets anyone but israeli jews second class citizens.', '“for the record i’m doing the best can and intentions are better than most peoples that know.”', 'for liberals who say that, recall dr. martin luther king, jr., who said was not the trumps and netanyahu’s his age that risked the civil rights movement,', '“i have almost reached the regrettable conclusion that the negro’s great stumbling block his stride toward freedom not the white citizen’s counciler the klux klanner, but the white moderate, who more devoted ‘order’ than justice; who prefers negative peace which the absence tension positive peace which the presence justice”-mlk', 'but think the best advocate for lana del rey reverse course 2018, lana del rey 2014, who cancelled her first visit israel israeli families literally ate popcorn and clapped celebration while gaza schools and hospitals were flattened while others cheered, “there school tomorrow, there are children left gaza,”.', 'it true that there are many conflicts all over the world, but americans are tied closest this one. fund it. defend the with veto that paves the way for israel’s right wing. and americans have unique responsibility and leverage end its criminal behavior once and for all.', 'your palestinian fans have already told the world what would help and have decided that it’s boycott.', jew have chosen this fight because done name, hijacking heritage and faith, and abusing the memory million sisters and brothers.', 'and you artist? you have millions young people behind you not only because your voice your music, but because the empathy that drives and connects directly with the generation that can change everything.']
2016 sydney morning herald', 'in 1967 israel won control the west bank result its success the six day war. its then prime minister levi eshkol wanted consolidate control planting settlements the occupied territory. asked theodor meron his chief legal adviser, whether this would legal.', 'no, said meron. the geneva convention says nation may settle its own population land wins war.', 'meron alive today, eminent international jurist. says was right then and right now.', 'all those settlements, all illegal.', recall conversation about years ago with australian business leader, just back from israel. held out some hope for negotiated peace.', '“but what about the settlements?” asked. the time was premier and patron labor friends israel.', '“bob, don’t worry. the israeli people get peace deal they will withdraw the settlements.”', 'next time looked settlement population numbers had soared another 150,000, something which left with the distinct impression having been conned no, having been lied the israel lobby. sure subscribe two-state solution, they insist, but while you’re looking the other way we’re spreading settlements fast possible render impossible.', 'both labor and likud governments have funded settlers, many religious extremists, and gifted them the best land.', 'meanwhile, palestinians are denied building approval for homes, even chicken coop. area they throw granny flat it’s promptly demolished army bulldozers.', 'if israel really open giving the land back peace deal why allow settlements the first place? that’s the question, i’d been sharper, would have put interlocutor. and settlements not just along the border. thirty-five per cent are now being approved deep the territory everyone sees ultimate palestinian state.', 'this the essence the boiling frustration that resulted america refusing veto friday’s security council resolution.', 'john kerry told the senate foreign relations committee that within days peace deal 2014 along came announcement 700 new settlement units. “poof!” said, the deal got blown sky high. barack obama’s envoy and former ambassador israel, martin indyk confirms settlements destroyed the deal. obama has said the same. hence this parting gift the outgoing president headstrong israel.', 'historically the aged and corrupt palestinian leadership has bear some responsibility. they’ve let their people down.', 'but right now the palestinians are offering demilitarised state palestine without army and western peacekeepers within their borders. hard imagine more explicit security guarantees.', 'sixty per cent the netanyahu cabinet the most chauvinist the nation’s history are record opposing two-state solution. other words, they want indefinite occupation. settlements are vital their design backed demolitions and land confiscation, nothing less than creeping annexation.', 'that means majority arab population per cent the west bank being ruled racial and religious minority per cent.', 'the israeli newspaper haaretz referred this year “the evil winds racism and nationalism sweeping israel”. general yair golan israel’s soldier, said the tone the nation reminds him europe between the wars, and was talking holocaust commemoration.', 'two prime ministers, ehud barak and ehud olmert, have warned their country risks getting saddled with apartheid, proving again that searching argument and criticism are among israel’s most resilient features.', 'but often nations under stress end adopting the policies their enemies would most want. this spirit benjamin netanyahu sleepwalking nasty denouement: greater israel, with arab population living under different laws, above all, with right vote. israeli labor policies are not jot different.', 'the security council resolution demands that the world now treat settlements differently from the rest israel.', 'europe was already mandating identification products from settlement industries, giving consumers ireland france the opportunity decide whether they want support illegal activities when they chose product supermarket shelf.', 'the resolution has undermined the nationalist strategy that says israel can lose europe but enjoy new partnerships asia and africa and with vladimir putin. the end not only france and britain but russia and china voted brand settlements flagrantly illegal. netanyahu left vowing retaliation against plucky little new zealand and senegal.', 'donald trump can tweet and bluster. but the resolution stands international law, taken seriously cabinets and bind the international criminal court. after years provocation israeli hawks that’s the genius what obama and kerry have pulled off.', 'if israel responds with more settlements, annexes slabs the west bank, then agencies and member states have decide how react.', 'leave that “how” another day.', 'in the meantime consider the following motion, elegantly simple one: “given that israel continues defy the 2016 resolution the security council and spreads settlements that palestinian state longer possible move that every resident greater israel afforded equal rights. this includes the right vote national elections.”', 'how would you vote that motion parish council church synod? union party conference? council meeting? campus?', 'and what happens next?', 'bob carr former foreign minister and nsw premier and patron australian labor friends palestine.']
tory behind palestine and israel history jewish european settler-colonialism i.e., zionism. and since racism symptom and tool settler-colonialism, zionism also viewed anti-semitism, and ethno-supremacy jewish supremacy, arabophobia and islamophobia.', 'the triangulation anti-semitism, islamophobia and arabophobia the history palestine and israel part the settler-colonial movement zionism and not “new history” the sense the term introduced israeli historian benny morris 1980 humanize, israeli academic discourse, the victims zionism. simply reflects modern terminology and encompasses historic events which the zionist mind still largely closed.', 'these historic events are simple their broad outline. zionist jews (self-proclaimed atheists) decided build jewish state palestine and ended taking much the land force and expelling the majority the palestinian non-jewish arab population, preventing them from returning. now israel occupying the rest the territory the world zionist organization didn’t manage take and continues “settle” it.', 'in the ends zionism: racism and the palestinian struggle, joseph massad writes:', 'zionism colonial movement constituted ideology and practice religio-racial epistemology through which apprehends itself and the world around it… longer contested, even among many israelis, that the impact zionism the palestinian people the last one hundred years includes: the expulsion majority palestinians from their lands and homes, the prevention their return, and the subsequent confiscation their property for the exclusive use jews; imposing military apartheid system those palestinians who remained israel from 1948 until 1966, which since then has been relaxed civilian jewish supremacist system discrimination; and the military occupation and apartheid system imposed the west bank and the gaza strip and their population for the last thirty-five years [now fifty years] well continued colonization these occupied territories.', 'in that sense, the history jewish european settler-colonialism i.e., zionism behind palestine and israel (as opposed history zionist “narrative” myth) has the voice reason behind it, because reveals atrocity that must redressed.', 'acknowledging and taking accountability for israel’s historic and ongoing crimes against palestinian arabs the first step resolving the nakba. the historic details regarding why and how these tragic events happened have filled many books, but they are beside the point.', 'the broad outline itself has the voice reason you also consider justice reasonable and injustice unreasonable.', 'what reasonable plausible, for example, about ivanka kushner now being able buy house jerusalem and “return” israel dint her conversion judaism and her american husband’s jewishness, but ghada karmi, muslim palestinian arab being denied return her homeland and not even allowed buy back her own father’s stolen house?', 'in humanizing the text: israeli “new history” and the trajectory the 1948 historiography, ilan pappe, who famously known for his the ethnic cleansing palestine, writes:', 'one thing clear when analyzing the fortunes israeli new history from the time its inception the late 1980s until its brief/temporary disappearance 2000: historical reconstruction closely linked general political developments and upheavals. societies torn internal and external rifts and conflicts, the work historians constantly pervaded the political drama around them. such geopolitical locations the pretense objectivity particularly misplaced, not totally unfounded.', 'radical jewish dissident historians like ilan pappe israel are vital history that has the voice reason its side. they are bridge wider public israel.', 'palestinians often wonder what takes break through the consciousness western publics with regard the 70-year-long tragic history palestine.', believe that the best way shifting western publics’ opinion from supporting israel supporting the palestinian cause continue emphasizing what has already taken place through the demise the so-called “peace process” and “two-state solution” the realization, long obscured, that the problem israel lies its nature zionist settler-colonial project palestine, rather than military “occupier”.', 'in why the term ‘israeli occupation’ must rejected, ramzy baroud writes,', '…it often argued that israel occupier that has violated the rules occupation stated international law. this would have been the case year, two years five years after the original occupation had taken place, but not years later. since then, the occupation has turned into long-term colonization.', 'many people believe that the great march return has had much positive journalistic reactions western media because the protest essentially non-violent i.e., cannot said threaten israel’s security and the deadly force israel uses “disproportionate” and criminal.', 'that’s far palestinian non-violent action goes. doesn’t anything change western publics’ perceptions israel legitimate western-like state protecting its “borders” (albeit with disproportionate force) against sea arabs their perceptions palestinians “rioters” and “barbarians” whose sole evil wish kill jews.', 'non-violent resistance has its uses, certainly, but must never pushed oppressed and brutalized people, view, higher moral ground resistance.', 'additionally, the emphasis the tactic non-violent resistance implicitly delegitimizes other forms resistance, making saints out some palestinian martyrs and hunger-striking prisoners held under administrative detention (i.e., those imprisoned without charge) and accepting israel’s justification for the execution and imprisonment thousands other palestinians. what’s different about the great march return that its demand return connects the “occupation” and siege with the nakba, dramatizing for western audience, through protest and resistance, the colonization all palestine.', 'that demand, heard for the first time the recent history palestinian resistance, shifting the perceptions western publics.', 'activists for justice palestine social media have long used different tactics (primarily documenting and publicizing israel’s violations international law and human decency) reach western publics (to break through mainstream media the west). the most effective are the palestinian campaign for the academic and cultural boycott israel (pacbi) campaigns that persuade academic big names and cultural and sports celebrities take the palestinian cause.', 'western publics are also becoming more aware the zionist backlash against the boycott, divestment and sanctions (bds) campaigns, especially they impinge freedom speech.', 'generally, addressing western audiences, especially those the left, works reference progressive values applicable injustices against all marginalized groups western society, brings home the incongruity singling the palestinian cause exception.', 'western audiences are assumed part the judeo-christian tradition, term coined george orwell the late 1930s order fight anti-semitism. unfortunately, this humanist tradition tainted, because anti-semitism and anti-zionism are now linked inexorably within it, and combating one means combating the other. western civilization has long been defined colonial conquest (with islamophobia and arabophobia the middle east) and imperial power; what gave birth zionism. furthermore,', once established its position military superiority, the colonial culture produces, through whole range media, unending ‘series propositions that slowly and subtly with the help books, newspapers, schools and their texts, advertisements, films, radio work their way into one’s mind and shape one’s view the world the group which one belongs’… successful colonisation leads the oppressed identify with the world view the oppressor.', 'the palestinian authority now identifies with its oppressor thoroughly that did not shy away, dictated israel, from cracking down viciously palestinians the west bank rallying against mahmoud abbas’s punitive economic measures gaza.', 'what will ultimately change western public’s perceptions are palestinians themselves, however they choose resist. they must insist liberation decolonization and not simply “ending the occupation”.', '_______________']
buttu haaretz jan. 2018', 'ahed tamimi has been indicted. the teen, who was picked night raid her town more than three weeks ago, has been held prison ever since.', 'the charges levied against her incitement and slapping heavily armed soldier not match the severity with which she has been treated: shackled, isolated from her family and with politicians and journalists calling for her eternal detention, or, even worse, that she “dealt with the dark.”', 'based israel’s 99.2 percent conviction rate for palestinian youth, ahed will likely convicted and will likely serve time prison. but while her official charges are assault, ahed’s real crime more basic: shaming israel’s occupation and refusing bow down israeli dictats.', 'ahed has spent her entire life not only living under israeli military rule, but under the guise oslo and the false promises negotiations.', 'she has never seen day without israeli checkpoints blocking her movement, without israeli settlers stealing her land and without seeing the army trample upon her village often the dead night kill, maim and injure her loved ones.', 'but, alongside these daily acts aggression, she has, her short lifetime, had endure talk “peace process” and “negotiations” towards “two-state solution” but never “freedom”.', 'for ahed was born after the false promises oslo, and after the diplomatic community turned its attention away from holding israel accountable for its now years colonization and military rule to, instead, press for “both sides” come together.', 'in short, while the world living the fantasy world negotiations and recognition, ahed living the brutal reality occupation where the settlers nearby halamish have superior rights her, even though they live illegally the west bank, and she considered “security threat” for daring challenge this reality.', 'and clear, this “shaming” israel that has prompted the charges against her. her arrest would not have happened but for her act’s ridiculing defense minister avigdor lieberman, who stated that the army’s “humanism can’t come the expense its deference and power not only the girl but also her parents and those around them will not escape from what they deserve.” he, like the israeli army, does not want appear emasculated young teen, female less.', 'her arrest would not have happened she were israeli settler who, like other settlers, has slapped soldiers broke palestinian child’s teeth, only released immediately.', 'her arrest would not have happened but for the tamimi family refusing stay silent and allow their oppression continue without denying the world the ability say: didn’t know.', 'for what israel seeks compliant palestinian one who remains silent the face oppression and who simply accepts her fate without daring stand her oppressor.', 'the tamimis are shining spotlight the occupation and israel afraid that the world will see its ugly secret: that has intention ever letting palestinians live freedom.', 'each new settlement announced proof positive. while benjamin netanyahu speaks negotiations, continues steal palestinian land. the tamimis not speak negotiations; they speak action.', 'what israel seems woefully oblivious that there are thousands aheds out there who know that not normal live besieged behind walls checkpoints; who know that apartheid will eventually fall.', 'people around the world have always risen against oppression. delusional believe that palestinians will any different than any other people for when denied our freedom, will continue resist.', 'perhaps the reason that israel sees the tamimis such threat because they represent what the current palestinian leadership not: defiant, active and unwilling remain silent. even the face donald trump’s threats cut aid the palestinian authority.', 'ahed did not ask hero and, indeed, she should not asked one. she teen who should enjoying her childhood. she wants talk about how much she enjoys soccer, who wants live her life like any other teen around the world. she should not have confront soldiers who shoot her family members, who deny her freedom and who terrorize her nightly.', 'and for demanding her freedom, for speaking truth power, the entire weight the security establishment comes crashing down year-old for doing one thing: holding mirror israel, and asking likes what sees.', 'diana buttu ramallah-based analyst and activist, and former adviser mahmoud abbas and the negotiating team the palestine liberation organisation. twitter: @dianabuttu']
'by tomas rowan*', 'anti-palestinianism hatred towards prejudice against palestinians palestinians.', 'manifestations anti-palestinianism might include the denial palestinian rights state palestine recognized over 135 member countries the united nations. frequently charges palestinians with conspiring harm humanity, and often used blame palestinians for “why things wrong.” expressed speech, writing, visual forms and action, and may employ sinister stereotypes and negative character traits.', 'contemporary examples anti-palestinianism public life, the media, schools, the workplace, and the religious sphere could, taking into account the overall context, include, but are not limited to:', '1. denying the palestinian people their right self-determination and nationhood, actively conspiring prevent the exercise this right.', '2. denial that israel breach international law its continued blockade gaza, and the occupation the west bank and east jerusalem.', '3. denial that israel apartheid state (if one includes east jerusalem the west bank part israel proper) according the definition the international convention apartheid.', '4. denial the expulsion approximately 750,000 palestinians during the 1948 nakba.', '5. denial that palestinians have lived this land for hundreds years and have their own distinctive national identity and culture.', '6. denial that the laws and policies which discriminate against palestinian citizens israel (such the recently passed nation-state law, and the spousal reunification act) are inherently racist.', '7. denial that there widespread discrimination against palestinians israel and the occupied territories matters employment, housing, justice, education, water supply, etc, etc.', '8. tolerating the killing harming palestinians violent settlers the name extremist view religion that put mildly, the way the demonstrations gaza have been handled catastrophe not massacre.', '9. making mendacious, dehumanizing, demonizing, stereotypical allegations about palestinians such especially but not exclusively, the myth palestinian conspiracy wipe israel off the map.', '10. justifying the collective punishment palestinians (prohibited under the geneva convention) response the acts individuals groups. the geneva conventions also forbid colonizing occupied land whether military occupation legal illegal.', '11. accusing the palestinians people, encouraging the holocaust with the not grand mufti who was banned from palestine 1937.', '12. applying double standards such claiming that the palestinians not want negotiate while supporting policies which make negotiation impossible, such forced expulsions and land expropriation.', '13. justifying mass reprisals against civilians also known collective punishment internationally recognized war crime.', '14. denying that “administrative detention” used against palestinian christians and muslims a.k.a. detention without charge trial also known “unjust imprisonment” which internationally recognized crime against humanity.', '15. denying americans the right boycott products from the occupied territories labeled israeli disallowing americans boycott foreign power (bds) under “penalty law” company individual not only anti-palestinianism anti american. naacp versus claiborne hardware american’s right boycott was upheld.', '16. denying that israel may not legitimate state because israel’s admission the united nations 1949 was stipulated full right return for all residents pre nakba palestine. denying that every act, declaration, mandate, resolution has specified full and equal rights for all residents including minorities. this includes balfour and others particularly slanted for jews.', 'criminal acts are anti-palestinian when the targets attacks, whether they are people property such buildings, schools, places worship and burial are selected because they are, are perceived be, palestinian linked the christian muslim faiths palestinians.']
'the national library’s photo collections include two albums whose pictures were produced the end the 19th century using the process known photochrom. what was this method and why the photos resemble oil paintings more than the black-and-white originals?', '(source; chen malul, national library, sep. 2017)', 'the first color photo was taken 1880 thomas sutton.', 'twenty years after the creation the first photographic image, swiss printer named orell fussli developed photochrom. unlike color photography that captures the object’s original colors, photochrom colorized black-and-white photos. fussli’s innovation was use lithography, printing method that had been around for centuries.', 'the first album, produced 1900, collection photos from pilgrimage austrians the holy land. but wasn’t the tourist-pilgrims who took the photos. that time there were several professional photographers ottoman palestine. these guys took the photos, and the coloring was done photochrom zurich.', 'the pilgrims, like other clients who were interested photos from the holy land, selected their favorite pictures, apparently places they had visited their tour.', 'so it’s surprise that most the photos the first album show key locations jerusalem and nearby areas. the only picture not from there jaffa. that photo, jaffa longshoremen are seen rowing the boat renowned tour guide rolla floyd. also see the guide himself, well few tourists.', 'in this album, the entrance plaza the al-aqsa mosque was given wonderful colors, with jaffa gate, lions gate and the foundation stone the dome the rock also getting their colors back. it’s possible that the way these photos were colored reflects the image the swiss employees had the land’s residents. all the photos they are shown wearing heavy garments with loud color combinations.', 'we know very little about the history the second album, which was produced earlier. know that every cardboard page there stamp ownership swiss evangelical school. it’s possible that the clients who bought the album visited the holy land, but they may have only been interested obtaining photographs from there.', 'the photochrom prints this album show landscapes ottoman palestine and syria. several photos the first album are found the second one well, sometimes the photos were taken slightly different moment.']
'you’re not supposed talk about how frustrating watch children screw things up.', 'you’re supposed patient when takes them minutes tie their shoelaces. you’re supposed applaud their migraine-inducing attempts play the violin. you’re supposed give your undivided attention they tell stories that somehow lack beginning, middle, and end.', 'but worst all when child wants “help” you with something. you know that accepting their help will quadruple the time, energy, and resources required get anything done. you realise that it’d far simpler the job yourself. you’re aware that they’ll get bored halfway through and give up. but what are you supposed tell them? they’re enthusiastic, earnest, eager contribute. you take deep breath, grit your teeth into smile, and watch them make mess.', 'if you’ve been watching the trajectory anti-racism over the past few years, you can probably relate. it’s become exercise patiently explaining things that should painfully obvious. it’s endless parade clickbait headlines and performative outrage. it’s dominated people who seem they want help but are hopelessly confused about how so.', 'for example, los angeles private institution brentwood school recently announced plans segregate parent-teacher meetings race part its (and i’m not kidding here) “inclusive excellence racial equity” initiative. white parents will meet with white teachers, black parents will meet with black teachers, latinx parents with latinx teachers. presume that interracial families will need separate the name progress.', 'watching these “allies” blunder their way around the anti-racism landscape feels like watching toddler trying perform open-heart surgery. the stakes are too high. the mistakes are too costly.', 'if child had idea this asinine, would easier cope. you could explain clear, age-appropriate language why racial segregation not the best path “inclusive excellence.” you could point out that while some parents may have issues directly related their race, preventing other parents and teachers from hearing them likely make those problems worse. you could remind them your gentlest, most tender-hearted voice that classifying people race promotes racism, rather than what was again? yes, inclusive excellence and racial equity!', few hours north the bay area, there’s meyerholz elementary school, where eight-year-old children learn rank themselves according the power and privilege their race, gender, and sexuality. it’s how you might reimagine jane elliott’s famous “brown eyes, blue eyes” experiment you utterly failed understand it.', 'these children aren’t learning look beyond their superficial differences. they aren’t learning the importance treating others with compassion. they’re being taught, eight years old, that the most fundamental aspects who they are will forever mark them “oppressor” “oppressed.” they’re learning think each other collection labels instead complex human beings. they’ll likely carry the hangover this “education” for the rest their lives.', 'then have the people who treat racism it’s treasure hunt. they scurry around search increasingly abstract, petty, blink-and-you’ll-miss-it forms racism submit for our approval. gardening, rocks, mozart, knitting, the countryside, cycling, floristry, fast food (but also veganism), and more have been “called out” the name anti-racism. even worse, respected news organisations uncritically publish this nonsense that everybody can see how “woke” they are.', 'if were more cynical person, might suspect that these people aren’t trying fight racism all. might ask whether headlines like “can dogs racist?” are designed anything more than attract clicks and advertising dollars. might even suggest that the people who write this garbage are motivated nothing more than greed and the desire collect virtue-signaling brownie points twitter.', 'and while i’d like give them the pat the head they’re desperately seeking, it’s hard ignore the fact that every column inch wasted “articles” about whether the smurfs were racist could have been used write about real issues. some issues feel little more pressing: that black male offenders still receive prison sentences which are, average, 20% longer than white offenders for the same crime; that black families are only half likely own their homes white families; that there are still serious disparities treatment and outcomes for students colour.', 'last, but means least infuriating, are the saviors: people who are excited show off what they learned during their mandatory diversity training that they haven’t noticed (or simply don’t care) how racist they’re being.', 'these are the people who target black police officers protests that they can scream their faces about black rights. they turn black lives matter rallies with whip marks painted their bodies without the tiniest glimmer self-awareness. they’re the same people who explain that people colour need special treatment turn late for appointments because it’s “culturally insensitive” expect demonstrate time management skills. they have taken terms like “white supremacy” and diluted their meaning the point that we’re losing the ability differentiate between benign ignorance and true hatred.', 'watching these “allies” blunder their way around the anti-racism landscape feels like watching toddler trying perform open-heart surgery. the stakes are too high. the mistakes are too costly. the constant distractions make too difficult focus the issues that matter. while want believe that their hearts (if not their brains) are the right place, it’s time blunt.', 'so, behalf everybody who has stake this fight, this “help” not helping. you’re pushing regressive policies and calling them progress. you’re squandering opportunities say something meaningful with garbage clickbait. you’re framing the fight for equality battle between “whiteness” and “blackness” when, you were little wiser, you’d know that it’s always required people all colours.', 'look, promise, soon we’ve finished making the world safer and fairer place for people colour, we’ll move straight onto pressing issues like why many robots are white. we’ll conduct thorough investigation into the racist history peanut butter and jelly sandwiches. we’ll answer all your questions about why racial segregation not marker progress. but until then, why don’t you and play with your toys something?', 'the grown-ups have important work do.']
ten years haitian woman, could not help but see that the subject racism had gradually become source alienation between us. present her story here, her own words, way give voice her concerns and, perhaps, come grips with difficulty more deeply sharing her experience woman color.', 'it surprised when husband, michael, american, started feel exhausted listening tales racism life well various run-ins with same new york city. what you when your partner seems out sync with core part yourself? have been active participant trying right society’s wrongs: fighting against the marginalization the palestinians, working get out the vote black communities and, judge haiti, refusing accept the institutionalized discrimination against people without means. so, initially tried patient with him, forcing myself not scoff roll eyes his pollyanna-ish views but, after while, the truth was undeniable: was getting sick and tired husband’s so-called racism fatigue.', 'he said that attributed virtually everything racism. got bagel with less butter than his, said would cry racism. ok, that’s bit exaggeration, but said that suspected racism often that had the nerve tell that reminded him woody allen’s character annie hall who was paranoid about seeing anti-semitism every turn.', 'for long time, tried hard show that not everything attributable racism. reached for more benevolent interpretations events and interactions much that became his polar opposite: just virtually saw racism everywhere our society, wound attributing nothing it. you can imagine how awkward this felt, especially because skills attorney made winning argument rather easy. his “brilliant” strategy passively listening me, minimally responding didn’t seem working. would continually press him, asking him what thought, didn’t agree with me, and on. after pitifully witnessing his feeble attempts appear interested, sometimes would accuse him being racist. knew didn’t exactly mean but hurt him nonetheless.', 'when were together, rarely saw instance discrimination racism, perhaps attributable living manhattan just being white guy. over time, though, wore him down, virtually forcing him start seeing things from different perspective, making harder rationalize experience something unintentional benign. much the racism life had become quite normal but not him. number incidents seemed particularly eye-opening him, remarkable virtue their unexceptional, almost banal, nature nothing near meaningful what are all going through after the murders george floyd, breonna taylor, and ahmaud arbery. few months ago, was the elevator our building with older white woman. looking tightly-fitting workout clothes, the woman said:', '“are you trainer here?” (our building has gym.)', shook head.', 'continuing smile, the woman said: “do you work the building?” (our building chock full black nannies and housekeepers.)', '“nope.”', 'the woman seemed flummoxed, said: live here.”', '“oh, yes, see, hmm.” the woman looked away.', 'this intrusion day, out the blue, minding own business, angered michael. while not fazed the slightest it, was amused his indignation. kindly allowed him vent, not rant (if only was better able the same for me).', 'thinking this might opportunity help him more deeply relate experience, asked him try thinking something similar that happened him, that suddenly intruded his day. came with rather pallid incident with his first wife when they were living phoenix. during one their screaming matches, they heard this rustling outside the empty air-conditioner sleeve and woman’s deep, husky voice yelled: “shut up, you christ killers.” the argument immediately stopped and they began rolling around the floor, hysterically laughing its ridiculousness, not because they weren’t jews, which they were, but for the insanity the thought applied them. not much make out that.', 'in december, was walking central park, coming home from visiting friend brooklyn, pulling l.l. bean rolling bag. two young, white women, holding hands, passed me, and then one abruptly turned back and approached. smiling, the woman held out her hand and said: “here some change for you, ma’am.” took the change, said thank you and the couple went their way.', 'when told michael what happened, initially laughed the pure absurdity it: fit, professional woman being mistaken for beggar homeless person! handed him the change and counted it, “congratulating” being $1.49 richer. asked why didn’t say anything; could have been educational moment for that couple. why bother, said, wouldn’t any good. perhaps there was charitable instinct under their condescension, suggested. blithely said that was different, principle, than driving picnicking while black, just not deadly disturbing.', 'the coup grace was when went see porgy and bess the metropolitan opera. needed foam-seat cushion see over the taller man sitting front me. got one from the coat check and left driver’s license security. after the show, went return the cushion and retrieve license. white woman started flipping through the cards without asking for name. she eventually pulled one out and handed me. had the picture dark-complexioned, black woman. (i’m lighter-skinned.) was not license. the woman seemed puzzled, insisting that must not have left license. asked her look again, this time giving her name. after much searching, she pulled out license. the woman seemed embarrassed, barely muttering apology. the ordinariness this was striking: all this woman could see was color the cultural center new york city.', 'why share these stories with you? certainly not any way equate them with what countless black people have suffered over the ages. would waste time and yours was just say that racism exists our society. would almost wasteful was just show how deal with racism with, hope, some degree equanimity. share them tell you what discovered about husband and maybe what helps partially explain why many good, decent white people this momentous moment have done nothing right the wrongs perpetuated the founding this country. seemed that did not want think the world was ugly often perceived it. the racism and casual cruelty clearly felt repugnant him but was far easier for him experience from relatively safe distance, like marching masse city hall protest the murder mr. floyd, demanding systemic change. was hell lot harder experiencing close, seeing its impact and not being able anything about it!', 'to clear, make excuses for husband thinking could shield himself from pain through his racism fatigue. but, over the years, experiences penetrated his shield, became more human. it’s possible that feelings have had deal with (and manage) all life order navigate through this world ours stimulated unresolved, unexamined issues his life, maybe stemming from his crappy childhood, but that’s for him figure out. the end, while cannot deeply relate all feelings woman color, perhaps has learned that doesn’t have numb himself his pain way avoid mine.', 'to read wife’s reaction this article, to: https://blog.usejournal.com/epilogue-to-how-i-dealt-with-my-white-husbands-racism-fatigue-472b41257062', 'medium.com']
ght black friend posted that needs call black tomorrow; “liked” his status and was immediately irritated when what appeared white female replied, “wish could the same.”', 'another friend mine, white female, posted long apology black, latinx, lgbt, and muslim people and ended the lengthy post with don’t know what else say you. i’m sorry.”', 'in the days leading the election, was almost exclusively middle and upper-middle class white women posting about how they just need everyone this election season “let live, let love, let vote” and “not judge each other, ok?” because “i’m over, like, the stereotypes!”', 'yet none the irritated white women acknowledged anywhere their exhaustion the rage and frustration that people color and lgbt folk might feeling because we’ve kinda wanted all those things the life, the love, the vote for hundreds years and have been routinely denied them. because of, like, the stereotypes. and the systemic, institutional oppression. and the culture white supremacy and entitlement. and the microaggressions the overwhelmingly privileged who had the nerve express irritation this election cycle when many americans have been terrified for their safety.', 'it’s all been lot swallow, particularly when those who have had the least stake this year have posted condescending memes about how shouldn’t even unfriend people facebook when they undermine our humanity because that’s the biggest threat democracy. (but not redlining, gerrymandering, voter suppression laws, and the electoral college.)', 'but the real trigger has been the shock. the absolute unpreparedness. the need proclaim this astonishment and all but out yourself having been blind and truly unbelieving what already done-told you was our reality all whilst being down for the cause.', 'more white people than can count, people who are quick profess themselves oh-so-woke, have expressed some real shock and dismay not only the election results, but the racism, sexism, xenophobia, and bigotry that paved the way those results. and this not just surmising what has them all their feelings. this reading their words: cannot believe how racist america is.” really never thought that bigotry would win out.” “what say the people color life, the lgbt people, the muslim people…i never thought hatred would make this far.”', 'dear liberal white people whom often love: advertising your shock and surprise that racism, sexism, xenophobia, and bigotry are pervasive enough hand that man the presidency microaggression. please stop.', 'i’m all about you processing your feelings. there are lot our feelings right now. but spare the advertisement just how shocking all is. don’t tell you “just can’t imagine” because some little black and indigenous ass have real big imagination when comes the racism and bigotry that has ruled our country for hundreds years. are not aghast that presidents who say bogus shit dance their way into office. are not paralyzed the injustice all, proclaiming “oh the humanity” and all that mess. have seen this before. and it’s not just the overt bigotry; that soft systemic racism can tricky, get it. had she shimmied her way into the oval office, may have been under the spell for minute. but don’t get twisted: black and brown and queer folk (especially the queer black and brown folk) have big imagination for the terrifying policy that follows the horrific rhetoric, whether that rhetoric being spouted orange-faced man promising wall white woman pantsuit warning superpredators. devastated, but no, not shocked.', 'for lot people color, this election was really about trying find the lesser two evils. america asked us: “how you prefer your racism blatant systemic?” and when couldn’t answer immediately, white liberals patronizingly walked through our own history and experiences guide the candidate that best suited their needs. when still needed time, white liberals got impatient and aggressive. when begrudgingly muttered #iguessimwithher, white liberals were like, “yaaaayy!’ and skipped away campaign. some took third-party stance and i’m the opinion that was privileged stance take, but hey, let’s not pretend that only the third-party votes helped decide this election. let’s clear: poor, angry, uneducated white men and women helped decide this election. educated middle class white men and women helped decide this election. those who exercised that protest vote helped decide this election. and any that’s shocking for you, then you weren’t paying attention institutionalized racism 101: divide shared economic interests and offer the poor white man seat bus, toilet, water fountain knows he’s not negro and will hand you presidency. dr. king already laid that out for ’65:', '“if may said the slavery era that the white man took the world and gave the negro jesus, then may said the reconstruction era that the southern aristocracy took the world and gave the poor white man jim crow. gave him jim crow. and when his wrinkled stomach cried out for the food that his empty pockets could not provide, ate jim crow, psychological bird that told him that matter how bad off was, least was white man, better than the black man. and ate jim crow. and when his undernourished children cried out for the necessities that his low wages could not provide, showed them the jim crow signs the buses and the stores, the streets and the public buildings. and his children, too, learned feed upon jim crow, their last outpost psychological oblivion.”', get it. it’s awful. it’s terrifying. it’s devastating. but find yourself white person and complain them, then get past your feelings because you really want ally, don’t need your posts your shock even your tearful apologies, but rather your organizing manpower. people color have always resisted and you can follow us. you can’t with her anymore, with us.', 'and black and brown brothers and sisters reading this, won’t tell you not discouraged, for discouraged. will not tell you that shall overcome, for tired overcoming. will not tell you keep keepin’ like there’s any other option for us. will only say that will resist alongside you love and justice because come from tradition resistance.', '“what know that will resist. come from tradition resistance…they wanna talk about ‘make america great again.’ what know the only glimpse greatness this country has ever had, the only glimpse the ideals this country was founded that we’ve ever had because our resistance. because dragged america kicking and screaming that our part this story. and the kickers and screamers won last night…i don’t know what comes next. but know that are going wake tomorrow and what have always done: will there for each other, will support each other, will defend each other, will love each other. and will spend the next four years giving them something kick and scream about.” -jay smooth', 'meanwhile, white girls reading this post like, she mad me???']
'as today, the mother the murder suspect who killed least one person charlottesville virginia during white supremacist rally, told reporters that all she knew the last time she talked her son, that was going “alt-right” rally. she had idea her son was racist did she?', 'racism the elephant the room america particularly, white america. white people would like racism away. the thought that their ancestors could have been slave owners embarrassment most.', 'in counseling many white americans who are against racism, one thing stands out: they are afraid confront their racist family members and friends. they are against racism, but they also love their family and friends. often asked, “april, don’t know what do. how confront them without upsetting them?”', 'racism complex scope because both mental illness and value. other words, valued, sheltered, and protected mental illness. one might even say has been incubated and allowed fester throughout the course american history.', 'mental illnesses are health conditions involving changes thinking, emotion behavior (or combination these). racism meets those criteria.', 'like all illnesses, needs treated order for cured. the problem, that not see racism problem, because not see for what infectious disease that has been epidemic plaguing our nation.', 'epidemics can spread rapidly and can notoriously difficult treat. the medical field, the way stop epidemic educate and involve the general population what the symptoms are order prevent spreading the disease. the symptoms are not recognized, then the disease spreads and exacerbates. can and will harm many people over the course time which racism has.', 'the mental illness that racism has killed thousands upon thousands people color, particularly, african-americans and native americans.', 'the murders charlottesville virginia would considered outbreak the disease. without swift and timely containment, will only further spread and spur new outbreaks.', 'to prevent the disease, important know the signs. like many diseases, the symptoms can appear subtly, and not treated, will get worse and become untreatable.', 'review the “racism scale: where you fall?” below begin explore and understand whether not you have symptoms.', 'if you fall below “awareness”, then this red flag that racism problem for you. not problem for you, but find that problem for your family members and/or friends, then it’s time address will continue spread throughout america.', 'like alcoholism, alcoholic cannot thrive without their enablers. the same white americans who enable their relatives and friends who are racist. important identify and recognize that racism mental illness and recommend that individual psychotherapist needed.', 'there easy way contain disease, but can identify the symptoms, then can put stop through education and awareness.', '__', '2/2/19', 'since writing this article, have say, that when wrote this article was knee deep racial trauma. this article, asked that white people perpetrate what now call (racist) projection, which write mini e-book.', 'when comes anti-racism work, important, able identify your unconscious racism getting intervention. and when you get intervention, you will able learn how act anti-racist ways.', 'at this stage work, had not healed from racial trauma. this content was deeply influenced racial trauma. whenever (poc), such myself, asked whites perpetrate this behavior, clear sign racial trauma.', could have deleted this article, but chose not to. wanted this reminder and lessons for all whites and (poc), that all have lot inner work and inner healing do. proud say, that now, have healed from racial trauma and longer influences the way see racist behavior society.', '—', 'published articles', '8/17/17: just published follow-up article this piece. titled the failure acknowledging racism mental illness america.', '8/20/17: you would like know when the right time confront friend family member that racist, then read article titled the right time confront someone you care about who racist.', '9/4/17: how politicians and political commentators reinforce and normalize abusive communication america']
list things that you’re going need catch on. buck up, because won’t easy.', 'are you still reeling shock the presidential election results? are you pulling your hair wondering, “how did this country get racist??” are you posting statuses about how now time come together fight racism the face current political threats? have you found yourself saying, “well, least this administration waking people up.”', 'hi! see you there! welcome the anti-racism movement. know you were kind hoping sneak the back class the middle this semester and then raise your hand few days offer expert opinion like you’ve always been here but you’ve been spotted, and have some homework for you, because you’ve missed lot and don’t have the time over all together. i’m glad you are here mean, i’d really rather you arrived sooner and i’m little/lot resentful how often have stop this class cover all the material for people who are just now realizing that this class they should taking, but better late than never guess) and know that once you catch up, you can contribute lot the work being done here.', 'if you are just now feeling the urgency the need fight systemic racism, chances are, you are white. know, know i’m starting off with blanket assumptions about you and that doesn’t feel good; you literally don’t have tell about it, i’m quite familiar! but seriously, you are probably white white passing (yes, i’m aware that ben carson and lil wayne exist and some people color are capable holding baffling amounts denial, but not have whatever power would take break through that level delusion let’s just stick with new white folk). i’ve written down this handy list things that you’ve missed far that you’re going need catch on, your own time. this knowledge and preparation will not only make your fight against racism more effective, will allow continue our progress you catch up.', 'if you are just now feeling the urgency the need fight systemic racism, chances are, you are white.', 'woah, know i’m starting off the most negative way possible but look, need you know what you are signing for. fighting racism one the most difficult things you will ever do. mean, reading this essay might little uncomfortable, but nothing compared the conversations you are going have have, the privilege you are going have sacrifice, and the brutality and pain you are going have able look the eye every day. not only will this work get harder and harder the further you dive in, you will also get what times seems like very small return your efforts.', 'if you want fucked-up silver lining, you can always remember that people color (poc) are also doing this work, never have the option taking break, and also have live through the actual racism being fought the process. so, buck and get ready.', 'it was beauty too floats and streamers and everybody was clapping and cheering. but then ended and swept all the confetti and everyone had get back work. sorry.', know you might saying “but how can you know that ijeoma, you don’t know me?” know. trust me. know. you are 10-year-old explaining theoretical physicist how time travel might work. the theoretical physicist has already heard your theory and many others. she probably had some those same theories when she was 10. and while your interest time travel and your imagination and intelligence might well lead you eventually help invent time travel, will only after has been paired with lot the education and experience that the physicist that you are trying explain time travel already has. but you are not actually 10, your ideas are not cute. keep them your hat for now while you learn the basics.', 'please don’t raise your hand tell all the tale how you came see that you are part oppressive system. were there. when you didn’t know, when your obliviousness was contributing our oppression, were there being oppressed. when you were ignoring our cries for help, saw you look away. you stumbled along the path recognition, were the people you took down with you each fall. would rather not over that all again.', 'but all not lost, and your story does have real value people who are not this room, who are afraid acknowledging the part they play white supremacist society. you can show fellow white people that they can survive the self-reflection necessary fight racism. please, share your story with them, can real good.', 'theestablishment.co', 'when poc were very, very small, got few years comfort and protection from some the realities white supremacist society. when were safe home with our parents, the effects systemic racism were muted somewhat, although never entirely. then when were and went preschool discovered were four times more likely suspended from preschool, and the time went kindergarten another kid called “nigger” another racial slur, and from then we’ve been neck-deep that shit.', 'so, you weren’t there, you missed it. nobody going hold your hand through this. you fuck up, you will called out. you slow down, you may left the side the road. are angry white people, will say are angry white people, and nobody going add “not all white people” for your benefit. you will find way keep going have.', 'nobody going hold your hand through this. you fuck up, you will called out.', know you would prefer nice, safe sit-down with someone who would patiently walk you through all this, but have millions people need get right and entire system white supremacy fight. not have the time energy. also that “free labor from poc” thing kind how got into this mess. the questions you are asking have already been answered poc some whom have already been compensated for their time and effort. google your friend. have live it, the least you can google it.', 'yes, are aware how dangerous this administration is. no, not have “better” battles picking right now. are doing multiple things once, because cannot sure the cops that will kill us, the racist jokes work fostering environment where are seen unreliable and dispensable that will leave unable feed our families. but know that all can kill body and spirit, one way another, will drag people for cultural appropriation and demand that schools provide more diverse education our children, while also raising alarm about the muslim ban, ice raids, and police brutality.', 'you could maybe help pick some the slack instead trying refocus our efforts way that makes sense someone who doesn’t actually have live with the consequences what you think should just “let go.”', 'that’s right: the biggest risk. the compromises you are willing make with our lives, the offenses you are willing brush off, the everyday actions you refuse investigate, the comfort you take for granted they all help legitimize and strengthen white supremacy. even worse, when you bring that into our movement and refuse investigate and challenge it, you slow down our fight against white supremacy and turn many our efforts against us. when poc say, “check your privilege,” they aren’t saying for fun they are saying because when you bring unexamined privilege into anti-racist spaces, you are bringing cancer.', 'no, i’m not just talking nonsense now. racial privilege like gun that will auto-focus poc until you learn aim it. when utilized properly, can real damage the white supremacist system and it’s weapon that poc not have. you have access people and places don’t. your actions against racism carry less risk.', 'you can ask your office why there are managers color and while you might get dirty look and little resentment, you probably won’t get fired. you can the “real americans” that politicians court. you can talk fellow white people about why the water flint and standing rock matters, without being dismissed someone obsessed with playing “the race card.” you can ask cops why they stopped that black man without getting shot. you can ask school principal why they only teach black history one month year and why they pretty much never teach the history any other minority group the u.s. you can explain your white friends and neighbors why their focus “black black crime” inherently racist. you can share articles and books written people color with your friends who normally only accept education from people who look like them. you can help ensure that the comfortable all-white enclaves that white people can retreat when they need break from “identity politics” are not comfortable. you can actually persuade, guilt, and annoy your friends into caring about what happens us. you can make measurable impact the fight against racism you are willing take the uncomfortable truths your privilege.', 'theestablishment.co', 'you are human being and human beings are inherently flawed. you are also human being who has lived with entire life unexamined privilege and racist social programming. you are going fuck hardcore. you are here because you are decent human, and because you are decent human you are going feel pretty shitty when you fuck up. you will probably called out, you may even dismissed some folk, and that may make you feel angry and defensive along with feeling shitty. you will need get used the pang guilt from realizing you have fucked and has hurt people. because will hit you again and again.', 'it okay feel guilty about things that you are guilty of. will not kill you, but hiding from that guilt and responsibility can kill others. feel the guilt, realize you are still alive and intact, figure out how better, try make amends possible, and move forward. you are not alone. are all fucking this various ways, every single one us. right now, there are whole big problematic chapters our movement. are all trying the work and wrestle with the ways which are causing more harm than good. but have choice but keep working, even when sucks.', 'you are here because you are decent human, and because you are decent human you are going feel pretty shitty when you fuck up.', 'i’m glad you are here. i’m angry you are late have mentioned that? i’m very, very angry you are late because many have been lost fighting without you. and you are going just have live with that anger for while because you deserve it. but also glad you are here. glad you are seeing more clearly now and have decided that you longer want part the problem. eventually, may get over anger and may even trust you, but until then i’m still going need you the work help dismantle the system that you have benefited from and have helped maintain for long.', 'because need your help, and know that you can help ways that cannot. your reward may not the warm welcome and heartfelt thanks that you might have been hoping for, but more just and equal world will have suffice.', 'theestablishment.co']
'washington d.c.’s pro football team. aunt jemima pancake products. eskimo pies. they’re all examples the everyday racism that bombards people color from the supermarket the playing field. they’re also all iconic american products that both corporations and consumers finally agree are ready for rebrand.', 'but what about the far more subtle streams everyday racism that course through our homes, our workplaces, and the outside world? these instances may far subtler than mascot offensive term, but are less pervasive and less deserving cultural reckoning.', 'for me, this reckoning begins with traffic signals.', few months back, before covid-19 kept our homes and george floyd made take the streets, was walking with friend, her daughter, and twin sons. friend white and i’m not something i’d never given second thought until reached crosswalk. “remember, honey,” she said her daughter waited for the light turn green, “we need wait for the little white man appear before can cross the street.”', realize that white people like exert control over nearly everything everyone does, thought, but since when did this literally include trying cross the street?', 'part surprise here was function age. boys are few months younger than her daughter and hadn’t yet tackled the “crossing the street” component basic toddler training. but black dad, was struck the language play. how possible that well into the 21st century, parents all over manhattan well-meaning, #blm-marching parents are teaching their children ask “little white men” for permission cross the street? and why doesn’t this seem bother them?', 'technology and necessity propelled the shift from verbal crosswalk cues lunar-white walking person. but heart still sinks the specter teaching sons ask white man for permission well, anything.', 'it certainly bothered much that began dig deep into fortysomething consciousness try and remember was raised asking little white guy let cross the street. were these the words progressive white mother used teach her little brown children the fundamentals pedestrian safety? turns out, wasn’t raised this way and neither, most likely, were you.', 'back when most were kids, stop lights and traffic signals across the u.s. typically relied words, rather than images, let folks know when walk wait stop cross. comb through photos “historic traffic signals” google images, and you’ll see archival photos traffic signs you might remember from childhood: boxy black consoles that lit with words like “walk” “don’t walk” imposing all-caps lettering.', 'but wanted know more. wanted know how and why this gender- and race-neutral messaging had been replaced “little white men.” quest first led traffic light manufacturers, who then led pedestrian safety consultancies, who finally led the federal highway administration (fhwa) which where things got interesting. because turns out that the “little white man” who raised ire isn’t exactly white. isn’t even really man.', “hominoid” how the folks the fhwa initially described him, though later they referred him gender-neutral “walking person’”— icon that actually dates back the 1940s. that time, “walk” and “don’t walk” typified traffic signage, but began phased out because words could misunderstood increasingly globalized populations. “the use icons instead words traffic signs has been slow but steady evolution for decades because they improve universal comprehension,” fhwa spokesperson says. “this not recent development.”', 'in fact, the walking person’s first major move actually took place 1971 when became enshrined the manual uniform traffic control devices the fhwa bible alternative the words “walk” and “don’t walk.” for the next four decades so, our little friend slowly, informally replaced its outdated predecessors until 2009; that’s when the walking person finally became the fhwa standard and, the spokesperson says, “the option use words longer permitted newly installed signals.” one day soon, every traffic signal will contain the walking person, along with its counterpart: the bright red hand telling folks not walk.', 'so the “little man” actually little person, but that little person still white. right?', 'close. it’s “lunar white,” according the fhwa: shade white with yellow and grey accents that mimics the color the moon. lunar white wasn’t chosen because sounds cool. according fhwa research, the agency spokesperson says, moonlight offers “the peak sensitivity for the rod cells the human retina.” other words, our vision predisposed favoring the clarity and intensity moonlight.', 'in the end, it’s not that the walking man super-duper white. rather, his true competitive edge that he’s super-duper bright. “the use bright colors… offers the greatest contrast against dark background,” the fhwa spokesperson says. “they not lend themselves confusion with other colors [and] are thought provide the greatest level comprehension and safety.”', 'and there you have it: the government-approved origins the “little white men” telling cross the street corners across new york. thanks help from the fhwa, now convinced that technology and necessity, rather than some anti-black conspiracy, propelled the shift from verbal crosswalk cues lunar-white walking person. but heart still sinks the specter teaching sons ask white man for permission well, anything. because much the world already insists that do.', 'at time when the totems systemic anti-blackness are being dismantled surprising pace, there comes moment when you have consider the endgame. and traffic lights are one those moments. because while this highly politicized period does demand racial rethink, overhauling the stoplight industrial complex probably not the best use our resources. white man isn’t really telling when cross the street, even hear friend blithely expressing those terms.', 'nonetheless, that little white man woke the ways that language imparts power and privilege even upon the most banal necessities. and so, begin teaching boys survival basics like riding bike, waiting line, and… yes… crossing the street, i’ll work hard avoid phrases like “little white man.” obviously “bright light person” rolls off the tongue far less mellifluously, but bit extra verbal labor worth the price not conceding our power even one more little white man.']
was years old and junior west scranton high school when boyfriend, chris, took summer music festival nay aug park.', 'my large irish-catholic family lived scranton, old industrial pennsylvania town once known for coal mining, railroads and electric streetcars. nay aug park was bustling amusement complex the mid 1900s, complete with carousel and small wooden roller coaster. but during our date 1997 the park was very different. owners shut most down then, and the city used for events instead.', remember walking around the festival with chris, ordering deep-fried food like pizza fritta from the local italian vendors, the haluski soaked with butter from the polish families who operated restaurants just few miles away. chris and sat the picnic bench, tapping our feet the sounds the live music we’d rarely get see, not being old enough enter any bars.', 'i’d scribble his name school notebooks for two years this was bonafide puppy love. that night, even held hands. was magical date and happy burst teenage hormones until dropped off home for o’clock curfew.', was lucky enough have the type amazing mom who waited for her teenager get home. her eyes closed, dozed off the couch with the blaring, only wake the sound slammed car door wrestling with house keys.', 'but this night’s return home was different.', 'my mom was wide awake, left startled anonymous late night phone call she received from some member our community who attended the same festival the park.', 'this person, alarmed, called mother report biracial relationship. the unknown caller said they recognized the park “holding hands with black guy” and wanted make sure she was aware.', 'in 1997 (and course very long before that), this type racist behavior was pretty common cities across america. sadly, twenty years later, still is.', 'born and raised town known for being the home nbc’s comedy “the office”, the scrappy city where former vice president joe biden gets his bfd grit, the popular final stop for presidential candidates the swing state pa., the city scranton has made its way into popular and political culture across america.', 'anyone who knows would say wear blue-collar roots badge honor. this very white, working-class town and big irish family taught whole lot. now 90-year-old, world war two veteran grandfather worked three jobs time, high school janitor morning, railroad worker night and father nine hours day.', 'anyone sitting branch this family tree learned the importance family, faith and friendships, what means loyal, what means have work ethic, and how fight for the little guy.', 'but it’s also this town, like many white working-class cities across the u.s., where racists are born. former president barack obama reminded the most liked tweet history, nelson mandela was right noting that child actually born hating another person, but not much time wasted these cities before many young people are taught hate.', 'my siblings and are among the lucky ones, each instilled with open hearts and minds and curiosity and appreciation for all this diverse world has offer, but have met and interacted with lot racists our lifetimes.', 'these racists are school educators, like the guy standing outside the bar 2016 who yelled “no niggers welcome!” black friend visiting scranton with from washington d.c.', 'these racists are local business owners, like the ones who didn’t want serve interracial couple one the city’s local establishments the guy charge the local bar for war veterans who still, 2017, won’t let anyone become member unless they’re white, insisting applicants apply person and telling minorities who show that “membership full.”', 'these racists are our facebook “friends,” like the popular middle school classmate who haven’t talked since 7th grade, but and his friends engaged recent social media thread that biracial dating “disgusting,” that should “ashamed,” that “our race screwed” and they have guns the ready “beat them [black people] the dirt.” unfriend.', 'and sadly, some cases, these racists share our dna, like handful members mostly open-minded and accepting family who tell jokes with the n-word and tell their daughters never bring black man home.', 'i’ve never written about talked about any these experiences public way given how much pain and embarrassment they bring, but this past weekend’s events charlottesville, va. are forcing think differently about role white woman our racially divided country.', 'the ignorant white supremacists, neo-nazi marchers from this weekend are people know. they are around daily, they are related us, and they are embedded the cultural, institutional, and political infrastructure this country more ways than care admit. but don’t talk about it. some hope will just magically away. some don’t think it’s our problem fix. some are perfectly fine with continuing.', 'after this weekend’s events, former washington post colleague and founder define american, jose antonio vargas tweeted:', '“dear well-meaning white people who want nothing with alt-right: we, people color, cannot carry this burden. you must engage.”', 'he’s absolutely right.', 'like most the white people whose hearts and minds are the right side history, i’m sickened what happened charlottesville. it’s the same feeling had when nine black church-goers were shot dead white supremacist south carolina, and the same feeling had when the not guilty verdicts came down after the deaths trayvon martin, philando castile, and freddie gray.', spent the hours following these events “engaging,” tweeting quotes from the most prominent civil rights activists like martin luther king jr., james baldwin favorite poet maya angelou. body filled with much rage that felt like retweets social media platform like-minded followers would make difference. but the right people were not listening. the right people were not reading twitter feed. what hope can now step away from our comfortable bubbles and get uncomfortable.', 'let’s really engage.', 'let’s speak up. let’s turn our closed-minded family members who make furious and ask them why. let’s turn our open-minded friends and family who text you privately “can post this?” and ask them why not.', 'let’s talk about race the dinner table, the office, our social media feeds, our evenings out with friends, anywhere might normally stay silent this tough topic. might feel like are saying the wrong words, don’t have words, think that will end doing more harm than good. let’s try.', 'let’s stop patronizing businesses that know are led people with racists beliefs. that will surely put the issue their front doorstep.', 'let’s not just stop laughing racist jokes, but asking the person why was told the first place.', 'let’s look around, study the diversity our workplaces and recognize our role making better. it’s not the handful minority employees create and execute diversity plan. it’s the white people every level across the company take responsibility for creating workplace diverse people and views and for recognizing what better company you will for it.', 'let’s get proximate. spent this week polling number family members, asking some how they ended open-minded growing our environment and asking others they think it’s possible change. those exchanges gave more hope this past week than anything i’ve read online.', 'some attributed their appreciation for diversity their proximity non-white members the family friends, others pointed “honest” history books, church teachings, travel other cities, joining diverse athletic teams and school clubs, and one even said was the women the family who truly helped reshape their views more than others.', 'and when posed the question other members the family who suspected weren’t following this week’s events and maybe didn’t care, they proved wrong. one challenged assumption and even pointed out how different things are since left scranton twenty years ago. said while may have been exposed lot racism growing up, our generation maturing and forming new opinions and beliefs our own. also smartly noted that every family and individual going have address racism differently. just starts recognizing it’s there and saying something out loud.', 'let’s begin turning the page our country’s history racism and oppression, knowing that page will only turn we, white people, acknowledge our role turning it.', '“in the end will remember not the words our enemy, but the silence our friends.” martin luther king, jr.']
and white and black. when got pregnant, decided move the countryside. wanted house with garden and rent out there was much cheaper. found beautiful farmhouse right out town country magazine, about kilometers outside geneva, switzerland. wasn’t far from where the singer and the genesis band drummer phil collins lived.', 'the farmhouse was rustic and spacious, with cozy feel it. there were numerous hiking trails the vicinity, and could already see myself rolling the hay and living the exciting outdoor life had always craved. moved during first trimester looked forward fit pregnancy full lots fresh air and walks the swiss countryside. was completely unprepared for how things would turn out.', should have noticed that despite our house being the center the village, surrounded many other dwellings, one acknowledged our presence came out say “hello” when arrived. there were passerby’s for sure, but whenever tried make eye contact, they looked away. put all the fact that were new and that they needed time adjust. after month being systemically avoided and ignored, began realize that there was something wrong.', 'one evening, husband and decided grab pizza the local pizzeria. figured would opportunity meet some our neighbors and eventually make some friends. entered the noisy restaurant and the entire room fell silent everyone interrupted whatever they were doing stare us. some seemed surprised and even shocked see us. their mouths hung open bewilderment. there were amicable looks sent our way. immediately felt uneasy and apprehensive, and walked towards the bar area, whispered oscar:', '“why don’t order the pizzas instead?”', 'my husband nodded his approval and placed our order with the waitress.', felt all the eyes the room back like treacherous daggers, digging in, inflicting inconsolable pain. calmly took seats wait for the pizzas but fight flight reflexes were fully alert.', 'that evening, hurriedly walked home the cool spring air, felt immense amount sadness. clearly, the people the village disliked us. were new, and maybe they didn’t like strangers, but what had witnessed during those few minutes the pizzeria, was their hatred. was the type steeped only deep racism and hatred blackness.', 'we had only lived there for month and weren’t ready move out just soon decided stick out. decided that would try and win over the villagers. for months, tried socialize with the community: engaged with the mailman when came around, attempted speak our neighbors, the shopkeepers, and the farmers the fields but were ignored made feel unwelcome whenever did. was very lonely time for us.', 'one morning, saw lady pushing pram walk the house. she was young and imagined she may more open-minded than the others. grabbed coat and headed out following her discreetly. she went toward easy walking trail and accelerated pace until were soon walking side side.', '“good day,” said politely.', '“hello,” she said, shy smile her face.', '“we just moved here, and haven’t met many people.”', '“oh, yes i’ve seen you and your husband. must tell you, this isn’t the best place for interracial couples, people are very close-minded here, most don’t like black people.”', 'my heart sank. mean had suspected this all along, but actually getting confirmation was disappointing. somehow, secretly hoped that what had felt about the place was wrong. mean was such beautiful village, yet the heart all that beauty lay racism, the most deplorable form ugliness.', 'rosemarie and got know each other better but never quite became friends. had feeling she simply tolerated me.', 'my pregnancy progressed and last trimester, had few complications and was put bed rest for hours day. drove work every morning and returned home lunchtime. every day, would walk through the village heavily pregnant, overdosing emotional pregnancy hormones and one ever said hello me. felt emotionally depleted, saddened the ugliness exclusion and racism. thought the innocent child that was bringing into this racist world and often cried.', 'as though compensate for all the nastiness and racism faced, husband spoilt immensely throughout pregnancy. remember having craving for salad, litchis, and vanilla milkshakes not all the same time and would out his way find them for me.', 'on january 31, 2001, water broke, and went the hospital the larger village nyon, which was about kilometers away. was lot more international there and the hospital staff was kind. secretly hoped that when returned our village with the baby, people would curious more accepting us. realize now that that was too much ask.', "once back home with our son, took every opportunity take him long walks. the motion usually made him fall asleep quite fast. crossed many the villagers but none tried friendly express any curiosity. three months later, moved back geneva with our baby. couldn't take anymore. moved back the diverse, multicultural environment knew, the place that had always accepted us.", 'often, white friends who live the countryside ask why live stone’s throw away from the city. they say that it’s expensive place and that should really re-consider the countryside. i’ve tried explain that interracial couple, don’t really have the freedom live wherever want. need sure that the community live open-minded one that accepts and respects us.', 'we chose where want live with laser-like precision order avoid exposing ourselves intolerable amount racism. grow older, know that won’t able cope with racism anymore. has caused too much pain and suffering.', 'and you might argue with that and say: “yes, can choose live anywhere want, but the reality can really? can ”', 'some places make you feel unwelcome that it’s not worth the emotional strife and discomfort. while too sometimes fool myself saying, free, the reality that i’m not really that free. most the choices life are dictated how much how little racism will face living here living there, doing grocery shopping here there, going the gym here there, getting facial here there.', 'many people don’t see racism being their business. they’ll skim through this article and think:', '“luckily, don’t have her life”.', "racism persists because you think someone else’s business and not yours resolve. but human beings, should all strive make this world better place, not for us, for future generations. and one the ways which you can this make antiracism your fight too. simply type antiracism into your search engine and you’ll find million and one resources help you your journey. you too can join this fight build nonracist world. don't wait, get right away!"]
'but what about us? it’s question which white folks never seem tire when discussing subjects like affirmative action, other diversity initiatives intended expand opportunity and access for people color higher education and the job market.', 'whenever these matters are raised, the vast majority rush protest: how dare schools employers consider race admissions hiring. they should colorblind, insist, merely admitting hiring the most qualified! and more the point, proclaim, targeting folks color for opportunities means discrimination against us, making the victims horrific reverse racism.', 'so, yes, remains the case that even when black folks have college degrees they’re nearly twice likely comparable whites out work; and latinos with degrees are about percent more likely than comparable whites out work. and yes, even whites who claim have criminal records are more likely hired than equally qualified blacks without records, but still, can anti-white lynchings far behind?', 'and yes, blacks and latinos combined only represent about percent students the most selective colleges and universities the only ones that actually practice any kind real affirmative action for admissions and there are twice many whites admitted elite schools with less-than-average qualifications there are people color admitted, but still, can any rational person doubt that whites will soon limited mere token representation the nation’s best educational institutions?', 'that such hand-wringing about so-called reverse discrimination reeks intellectual mendacity should obvious now. despite years so-called reverse racism, whites remain atop every indicator social and economic well-being when compared the african americans and latinx folks who, claimed, are displacing from our perch. whether looking employment data, income, net worth, are the ones better shape without exception.', 'indeed, some regards the gaps between whites and folks color have grown recent years, with wealth gaps, which have actually quadrupled since the 1980s, now leaving the typical white family with over times the net worth the typical black family and times that the typical latinx family. even when comparing families middle-class income and occupational status, whites possess 3–5 times the net worth middle class blacks, suggesting that even african americans who have procured good careers and obtained college degrees lag well behind their white counterparts, due large measure the inherited disadvantages past generations, affirmative action notwithstanding.', 'ulitmately, claiming that affirmative action not only disproves white privilege, but indeed suggests its opposite black and brown privilege many have argued via email exchanges, ignores the entire social context within which affirmative action occurs.', 'it’s like protesting that sick people are privileged, relative the healthy, because there are hospitals for the latter.', 'it’s like complaining that the poor are privileged relative the well-off, because one sets soup kitchens serve the affluent; nor does habitat for humanity ever show build mansions for the rich.', 'it’s like insisting that the disabled are privileged because they get bigger bathroom stalls, because all those special parking spaces, and that the able-bodied are oppressed because have walk bit further when shopping the mall for groceries.', 'it’s like complaining that women are privileged and men oppressed because hospitals don’t have paternity wards.', 'it’s like whining about how the lgbt community privileged and straight and cisgendered folks oppressed, since, after all, “the gays” have their own parades and bars that cater their needs. where’s our parade? where’s our bar?', 'it’s like inveighing against the privileges enjoyed jews muslims, what with that kosher halal certification you can find grocery items nowadays. obviously, going out the way make sure observant jews and muslims know what food for them eat nothing less than naked favoritism! after all, where’s the little jesus cross let christians know what food holy for them?', 'it’s like rich people, who make millions even billions (and such, likely pay pretty hefty tax bill annually) complaining about how working class folks who earn only $15,000 not only don’t pay income taxes, they actually get refund the form the earned income tax credit! such, it’s obvious that the working poor are the truly advantaged society! and this especially true when you think about all the thrift shops and discount stores that are established serve them, and those check-cashing outlets and pawn shops! entire infrastructure just for low-income people. where are our food stamps? where’s our government cheese?', 'for that matter, one might ask where’s our national association for the advancement white people? because don’t have notice how there are several these, implicitly, throughout the culture: the fortune 500, the chamber commerce, your friendly neighborhood police force among the most obvious.', 'or, where’s our white history month? which the kind imbecilic query that could only emanate from the lips one who has had the luxury glibly ignoring that have several, though they the tricky names may, june, july, and on, and which months white people’s historical narratives are given quite bit more than momentary consideration.', 'in other words, when whites critique affirmative action, typically ignore everything that came before such efforts, which skewed the historical balance power and access our favor, and even that which continues favor now, from funding and other advantages the schools that mostly serve our children, preferential treatment the housing market, ongoing advantages employment.', 'for instance, with black and latino students far more likely than whites attend concentrated poverty schools, and with the typical black latino student attending school with twice many low income students the typical white student, and being twice likely taught the least experienced teachers and half likely taught the most experienced, more than bit disingenuous suggest that it’s black and brown kids receiving “preferential treatment” education.', 'with companies filling half their new jobs way recommendations made pre-existing employees practice that benefits those persons connected others already the pipeline, who will disproportionately white and with informal, typically white-dominated networks providing the keys the best jobs the modern economy, and with research indicating that employers are more likely hire people they’d like “hang out with,” than those who are necessarily the most qualified (which will tend replicate race and class homogeneity), and with blacks significantly underrepresented management positions, stands uniquely craven complain about how persons color are receiving unjust head starts the labor market.', 'that even middle class blacks, relatively protected their economic and educational status from overt mistreatment, still suffer disparate rates job dismissal (even when their performance indicators are comparable those whites), lower mobility when compared similar whites, and regular harassment the job, makes such arguments all the more repugnant.', 'with people color significantly more likely than whites steered subprime mortgage loans even when their credit scores and incomes are comparable (or better) than their white counterparts makes downright indecent argue that it’s whites who are getting the shaft and people color who are reaping the benefits some iniquitous system preference.', 'and yet, that’s what one can hear, over and again, from the very white americans who regularly bemoan what they call the “victim” mentality black folks and other “racial minorities.”', 'as in, “if were just black, i’d have gotten into harvard!” conveniently ignoring that you’d been black you’d have been black your entire life, not just the day you applied harvard.', 'which say that long before you sent your college application, you’d have been black child, born country where black children are twice likely die infancy the white child you actually were.', 'you’d have been black teenager, country where black teens who are actively seeking jobs have unemployment rates that regularly hover around percent, and are more than twice the rate for white teens, like the one you actually were.', 'you’d have been living black family, whose parent parents would have been twice likely out work and three times likely poor the white parents you actually grew with.', 'and you had committed crime youth, you’d have been six times likely incarcerated for that crime than your actual white self, even the crime details and your prior record were different than they had been your actual, white world.', 'in short, claims white victimhood only make sense one has imbibed mentality entitlement that one actually believes whites earned all that extra stuff, that earned our better health, the relative wealth status merely inherited from our families (which inherited from theirs), preferential treatment from cops. which say, it’s the kind thing that can only make sense those lacking the most basic capacity for critical thought, and anything remotely resembling that which might call, perspective.', 'such the face white privilege the twenty-first century: systematized reality normalized and taken for granted the majority whites, that any deviation from its totalizing script becomes cause for alarm the eyes millions.', 'that such weak, hypersensitive and over-indulged group this should wield such power would funny were not dangerous.', '_______', tweet and facebook. podcast, speak out with tim wise, available itunes and google play, and post bonus audio commentaries and content patreon page. speaking engagements are booked through speak out: the nation’s premier non-profit speaker’s bureau.']
ions from black female journalist america the precipice', 'hello friends:', offered version these remarks powerful civic group recently. part discourse america peril, explained how hard has been black female journalist. this may the most personal and emotionally vulnerable writing i’ve shared publicly life. after all, wanted tell other people’s stories, not own.', 'many times i’ve been thwarted doing job telling the truth managers who either disbelieved news judgment (see “cherry picking the facts”), permitted harassed/humiliated, openly stripped and team resources. after wrote this essay the group, had conversation with prominent trauma studies specialist jack saul who said that journalists denied the chance tell the truth their newsrooms found damaging more than the effects witnessing violence, war, disaster.', 'it was massive aha moment for me. being denied the chance tell the truth and help the world doing betrayal the very premise our profession, one have felt acutely. times, have questioned whether years journalist were wasted, since the act telling the truth did not prevent this painful moment history measurably change the newsrooms tried de-bias. but just one runner long relay race towards justice, and have accept with humility that cannot determine the outcomes, only own actions.', 'having covered the past six elections, now find myself the cusp adding voice 2020 coverage well. this fall, launched the radio show/podcast our body politic with coalition public radio stations: kcrw, kqed, and kpcc, plus producers lantigua williams co. our body politic focuses women color superdemographic american politics, and ask how can save and improve our own lives and that our nation. the marginalization many journalistic voices has impoverished our discourse and, argue the essay, imperiled our national survival.', 'here are two ways you could help our body politic:', 'one, feel free offer donation. goes without saying that many people are living financial fumes right now not here add that stress. useful for media organizations get number small donations well larger ones demonstrate support for the concept.', 'second and more importantly, want know you. and want know who you want hear from the show. this show about harnessing our collective wisdom help co-create future want live in. i’ve been inspired the work the guild future architects and their work on, they put it, “collaboratively shaping just, inclusive, and prosperous world.” this form will allow you share little bit about yourself you want part the interviews, virtual call-ins and voices from around the country; add the name someone you want hear interviewed. (you can also share the form via https://forms.gle/mdwqq3ve8phdpxo7a)', 'launching new radio show both life-affirming and terrifying. have lots scar tissue from past experiences journalism, and also play lots different roles career now. some ways would easier let this part life go. the world filled with brilliant female journalists color who cover politics exclusively critical part their work yamiche alcindor, asma khaled, lulu garcia-navarro, nikole hannah-jones, weijia jang, amna nawaz, april ryan and maria hinojosa just name few. all are different from each other and all are complete rockstars. fills soul see them succeed. approach what have add with humility. i’m also doing this learn. the past few years life have been education the business journalism and storytelling, which didn’t plan with life but for which grateful. constantly awe creators know like dream hampton, who can pull together multiple award-winning productions dizzying pace. she and the many other sisters media give hope.', 'the following speech/essay not primarily about time journalism, but you will see many examples from it. the ways which women color are marginalized telling the truth exemplary larger national struggles. the primary focus about how are dying and will continue die nation because racial animus, and what can about it. it’s long. get yourself tea coffee and settle in.', 'sending love all the people making journalism, america and the world better,', 'farai', '______________________________________________________________', 'reflections from black female journalist america the precipice', '______________________________________________________________', 'let start with quote from toni morrison*:', '“the function, the very serious function racism distraction. keeps you from doing your work. keeps you explaining, over and over again, your reason for being. somebody says you have language and you spend twenty years proving that you do. somebody says your head isn’t shaped properly you have scientists working the fact that is. somebody says you have art, you dredge that up. somebody says you have kingdoms, you dredge that up. none this necessary. there will always one more thing.”', 'as black woman zimbabwean and black american heritage, racism has been more than distraction me. diminished earnings and impact field journalism which love; impeded chances have biological child when walked away from discriminatory workplace and had spend down savings planned use fertility; and caused the deaths friends, family and neighbors.', 'i’ve seen some form this era rage, socioeconomic collapse, and reckoning coming, even others profession seemed think was histrionic. lot that pattern recognition honed over years journalism. also live majority-black mixed-income neighborhood where least neighbors building died covid the first month the epidemic alone. many are essential workers and retirees, with newer members the community tending white-collar workers all races.', 'think about our era like train crash and derailment. many people without privilege, including essential workers, were the front the train. their lives have been impacted throughout the trump presidency and well before catastrophic economic distress and political disenfranchisement. the next people feel the train going off the track were people like me, who had either had deep lived experience working income communities color; pattern recognition skills attuned race/class issues; both. others including many those who control what makes the news live lives privilege the back the train, and maybe didn’t feel anything first when others were impacted. but i’d say for damned sure that everyone knows we’re off the rails nation now.', 'the economic disenfranchisement black people and other people color not limited any way poor working class folks. have dealt with extreme amounts race and gender discrimination within journalism. incidents included having grant made black-interest show npr stolen another team’s white co-workers. no, not exaggerating, and yes have proof. later was harassed white co-host wnyc’s the takeaway. ceo laura walker let him create hostile work environment for three female cohosts african descent, and sexually harass asian women. nonetheless, was protected and made twice much female cohosts. lost income and, case, probably last chance have biological child. told laura about the harassment directly her face, and she did nothing, she can’t pretend ignorance. yet this month, she became college president!', 'this total #fail meritocracy, decency, and intersectional feminism. black woman could survive documented history allowing man harass string white women and then elevated college president. but walker gets the moral leader that young women color, and men and women every race, rely tell them what means productive and moral citizen the world. and walker far less qualified, with terminal degree, than many black and poc candidates for her job. white colleagues protected her, and white privilege protects her this day. it’s outrage. other words, it’s just another day being black.', 'i’m gratified launching new radio show next month, our body politic, centering women color politics. but not exaggeration say that was robbed years doing chosen work the level excellence which operate, with sufficient resources. today, help other journalists and storytellers find financial and production resources.', 'so, getting paid what i’m worth and being treated with respect industry has been nightmare. you read media news, you’ll see the entire public radio system, and many other media outlets, are being wracked the racial equivalent #metoo. not only were journalists color robbed opportunity, the nation was harmed our exile and marginalization. dare say you ask any black reporter about the 2016 election, knew donald trump was serious contender way before our white colleagues realized that. (and some didn’t realize until election night!)', 'at fivethirtyeight, was prevented from reporting the impact racial animus politics for months, because nate silver thought was, his words, “cherry picking the facts.” was just doing job and matching historical patterns, including the career arizona’s sheriff joe arpaio, the 2016 race. took nate months announce that had come around recognizing the (obvious) pattern trump’s viability and reliance racial resentment. still sad about all the stories was not allowed tell because white supervisor believed was motivated racial score settling and not telling the truth. nate and have talked about recently, but i’m still not sure takes responsibility for suppressing work could have added our collective knowledge.', call what went through the black cassandra complex. black women often see the future, because have hone our pattern recognition skills survive, and have imagine better future carry on. but when sound the alarm, one listens us. fact, get penalized for speaking uncomfortable truths. one friend mine who black female tech investor said, wish didn’t cost tell the truth.”', 'let tell you one story about telling the truth with integrity. 2016, was verbally sexually harassed trump voter interviewed eastern ohio. could have put story. but believe would have prejudiced readers rather than enlighten them. could have gotten ton buzz for talking about own sadness, anger, and shame having been verbally violated. but that’s not what was there cover. put the story before story. believed and still believe leaving that incident out was the right choice, and that writing about later separate article was the right choice too.', 'so remaining true calling and earning money has been hard. it’s also been hard hold money. during life, have helped members extended family, including one point father. dad was brilliant and principled, and dealt with mental illness later life. quit his job the first post-independence news director the zimbabwean broadcasting corporation because robert mugabe was forcing him add propaganda the news. was blacklisted and died relative poverty. so, discrimination made earn less than colleagues; and also paid what south africans call “the black tax” aiding family zimbabwe and the us.', 'people who champion capitalism have some hard choices make choices just hard the ones facing democracy. american capitalism just one variation theme. many other capitalist nations, people varied income share both the prosperity and the pain progress better. their capitalism less callous, less cruel, and less unequal. our version capitalism grew from the bloody soil slavery which senator tom cotton recently called “necessary evil” and from the land theft from indigenous tribes. please check out the supreme court case united states sioux nation indians learn more about just one case that pivotal understanding the scale theft. other words, “blood the leaves and blood the root” much part the story capitalism innovation and industry. and although black folk are certainly better off than slavery, are bound intergenerational system labor discrimination and financial industry bias.', 'capitalism regional execution. for example, german capitalism, while not perfect, far more sophisticated and compassionate than american capitalism many ways, including support for working parents. course, we’re the only developed country which doesn’t mandate paid parental leave, and which has little support for childcare. germany also kicked our ass economic strategy re: the pandemic. (see: kurzarbeit). have capitalism, and does germany. but here people die “externalities” our particular brand capitalism far too often, brutal numbers. (see: purdue pharma.)', 'american capitalism particular mix capitalism, kleptocracy and oligarchy, and arguably becoming more the latter two over time. nonetheless, believe that black americans should access the wealth and opportunity this nation. the work, and have done forever. built the white house and the capitol for pay, i.e. slavery, back the days where were counted 3/5ths human being. today, black women get cents the dollar that white men make. that’s not half loaf… but it’s 3/5ths loaf, right?', 'one example what’s profoundly wrong with our system comes through analyses the ppp loan process. the national community reinvestment coalition sent black and white testers banks talk about securing ppp loans for their small businesses. the black applicants were deliberately given sample profiles that were financially stronger than the white testers. nonetheless 43% the time, the white tester received preferential treatment.', 'because our federal government does not like keeping racial data anymore, the sba not the best place find out where the money went. but some states were more data oriented. north and south carolina, which have black populations greater than percent, only percent ppp loans over $150,000 went black companies. it’s estimated that percent black-owned firms were shut out ppp funds, and that half black owned businesses may not survive the pandemic.', 'this just part pernicious intergenerational caste system which suppresses the earnings and life options black americans… what some people call “negative compounding interest.”', advise everyone read the magnificent book caste isabel wilkerson. i’m fascinated her words that “the subordinated caste, too, has been fixed from the beginning the psychological floor beneath which all other castes cannot fall.” yet whites are falling too, and those who are falling blame blacks and immigrants, when frankly, don’t have enough power dictate their lives. black, latino, non-white, and immigrant are being left feel the blows. the people beating down blame for crimes against the american way life did not commit.', 'as practicing journalist, believe our race and class caste system has been not only toni morrison-style distraction, but something like psychic privacy fence, keeping perfectly smart and privileged people white and non-white from understanding how desperate our nation has become. part that because the work black, latino, and non-white journalists has been suppressed decade after decade when didn’t fit the cultural frameworks our white managers. (kerner commission report, anyone? we’re reliving half century later.) also have little access capital form our own enterprises, even though the time ripe. capital and deal flow affecting black entrepreneurs horrid and prejudicial. you can research for yourself. have spent years researching facts, hoping that “one more thing” that morrison spoke about would convince white americans invest justice. still that sometimes, but believe that white americans have take responsibility for doing data and social analysis inform their lives, rather than requiring black americans constantly justify our existence, values, and economic fortunes.', 'perhaps asking white americans more their own research about race will actually add the understanding the gravity our times. perhaps not. caste, isabel wilkerson says: “it was common hear certain circles the disbelieving cries, “this not america,” don’t recognize country,” “this not who are.” except that this was and our country and this was and who are, whether have known recognized not.”', 'on recent call favorite high school teacher, who not long ago celebrated her 70th wedding anniversary and helped desegregate two schools, imagined conversation with shocked good white people thus: “join the world honey. this it. you’re looking it.”', -', 'i’ve been looking meaning american reality, good and bad for decades now.', 'my own family example the caste system too. every generation until mine, have been forbidden buy land white areas (see: redlining), which diminished our wealth, and faced extreme job and salary discrimination. grandmother paid awful price financial and psychological for being whistleblower about racial discrimination her government job. she was vindicated principle, and changed the system. but she never recouped the money she lost from seven years being denied promotions and raises; spent her final years financial anxiety; and died medical malpractice believe was related racism.', 'she told many tales about visiting her grandfather virginia, james porter montague, who served the civil war and was raised white family. this happy inspirational story? not quite. from what know both from historical documents and family oral histories did with elders, the white family was led james’ father, who sold his enslaved mother downriver when the boy was nine years old.', 'what does mean free only the extent that you have the indulgence someone who also harms you? sounds lot like metaphor for contemporary america.', 'going down the generations, family has fought the civil war, world wars and ii, korea, vietnam, iraq and afghanistan. are people who serve many ways educators, doctors century ago well now), plus ecological scientists, programmers and engineers and our parents’ generation. all have faced discrimination.', 'my mother, promising american journalist who worked zambia and interned the washington post after graduate school, was shut out american journalism based race and gender. she became teacher who worked two jobs support and sister when were young. recent dinner with cbs “60 minutes” correspondent bill whitaker, told his father was also aspiring journalist blocked racial exclusion, mother was. both are walking the ghost footsteps parents who never got live their dreams.', 'so have dedicated life journalism, and has paid back with mix joy and pain, visibility and lack resources; lower earnings than people with less talent and seniority; and inability change systems biased against telling the truth. (the original “cancel culture” has been blocking black and non-white contributions our collective knowledge.)', -', 'but enough about the black people and how the caste system has harmed us. what about whites?', 'that not sarcastic question. it’s matter life and death.', 'today white americans are dying covid-19 because the secondary effects anti-black racism and anti-immigrant xenophobia. the election donald trump would not have been possible without weaponized racial resentment. any other president white non-white; democrat republican could have done more stop the virus. but it’s not just the president. even before took office, our public health infrastructure was compromised racial resentment policymaking, from pandemic preparedness medicaid expansion.', 'last year, dr. jonathan metzl published the book “dying whiteness: how the politics racial resentment killing america’s heartland.”', 'in the book, speaks with “trevor, forty-one-year-old uninsured tennessean” living low-income housing and dying from liver damage from hepatitis neighboring state kentucky adopted the aca and medicaid expansion, while tennessee blocked it.', 'trevor supported that. quoting him the book talking metzl: ““ain’t way would ever support obamacare sign for it,” told me. would rather die.” when asked him why felt this way even faced severe illness, explained: “we don’t need any more government our lives. and any case, way want tax dollars paying for mexicans welfare queens.” ‘', 'metzl says that trevor died dogma… “dogma suggesting trevor that minority groups received lavish benefits from the state, even though himself lived and died low-income budget with state assistance. trevor voiced literal willingness die for his place this hierarchy, rather than participate system that might put him the same plane immigrants racial minorities.”', 'metzl adds, “the white body that refuses treatment rather than supporting system that might benefit everyone metaphor for the decline the nation whole.”', 'this how die, not just individuals, but nation.', 'we die when good white people the white moderates rev. king criticized more detrimental progress than the kkk simply throw their hands and say: “this isn’t the america know!”', 'well, isn’t time get know america then? specifically, i’d love privileged people dress down, the dollar general. waffle house, order coffee. you don’t even have drink it. just….listen. listen america. preferably many different types working income communities.', 'in order know america, have met klanspeople parking lot after blizzard; talked members the aryan nation; been sexually and racially harassed both sources and co-workers; and been… free. give set rental car keys and tape recorder and can show you the world. have foresight, not the mystical sense but because i’ve honed ability predict futures based study past patterns and constant meetings with people across the spectrum race/class/gender/identities. and this what know:', 'no matter who wins this election, the culture wars will rage on. predict that personal and property crime, including and especially white vigilante violence, will least briefly intensify rather than subside after the election. and people will die.', 'americans all races will continue die part because hard liners, including wealthy ideology-driven funders, pushed the politics racial resentment. white moderates assumed wasn’t their problem. now even some the wealthiest white americans cannot travel freely internationally their private planes because people who only have passports are global pariahs instead global citizens. the children the wealthy may not able college campus the fall, large part because the weaponization race and class made “fail” the pandemic. and that, course, nothing compared what working class people are going through. the willingness many ignore even leverage for personal gain racial and class warfare made less nation than could be.', 'let repeat: this how die.', 'more specifically, not change course, this how die both individuals and nation, economically, physically, and spiritually.', —', 'so how live?', 'we live asking ourselves where fit america’s caste system; being honest about whether not care about fixing it; and do, being about it. can take whatever role the universe occupy, from homemaker fortune 500 ceo, and begin moral inventory about what our role solving our collective problems. our areas excellence, and imbue them with values that make our world better, ways big and small. have skin the game. lose sometimes. don’t hoard resources while people are dying, underpay essential workers. examine systems taxation, infrastructure, and education for long-term efficacy. not make ending the race/class caste system someone else’s problem.', —', 'let touch what companies and co-workers can do.', recently went through gut-wrenching moment where another woman color (from different race) and spoke out about company both had worked at, and which harmed both. many white former employees spoke out support us. they named the top manager the problem, and said should better. the only thing few these same people spoke when were employed. walked lonely road standing for our dignity. case, also stood publicly for all the women the company who were overwhelmingly white.', 'i’m tired fighting for people who don’t fight for me.', 'white people: you see something, say something….. don’t pretend ally. don’t need post-facto support. just need paid fairly for the work and given chance perform zone excellence.', 'and here’s suggestion for companies and managers:', 'pay people diversity work. women and people color have been going boring useless diversity meetings for years, disproportionately doing the unpaid labor which the end not embraced leadership. so: make your diversity committee competitive. make people apply and state what they can offer; give people fixed amount money for serving; offer them bonus they great work; and most importantly, reserve pot money that the vetted committee gets disburse. diversity work will never meaningful continues done only underrepresented groups for money.', -', 'let circle back toni morrison’s words racism and distraction. let’s consider them the context white deaths from covid and the lack pattern recognition and historical context about how america became what is.', think today racism distracting white people from examining their own mortality, and the mortality american civic life. black people live with mortality every damned day our own, our families’, our communities’.', 'none will live forever. our nation might not either. and how long america lasts and how healthy depends you. don’t have enough power and leverage save america from our own worst instincts. but do, collectively. can have honest conversations and apply resources where they belong, have shot. will not come without personal cost you, just has not come without personal cost and others.', 'we breathe each others’ air. not share the same struggles, but share the same earth. wish that was enough reassure that are path shared prosperity and civic survival. the jury out.', wish all good luck co-creating world want live in.', '/end', '_______________________', the amazing data journalist lam thuy shared the toni morrison quote with me. you can listen morrison’s full 1975 speech here.']
'karena gue orangnya malas pakai intro panjang-panjang dan sebetulnya malas nulis, jadi mari kita langsung the point aja. btw, tulisan ini adalah opini pribadi selama jadi pegawai berbagai industri selama tahun terakhir juga cerita dari beberapa rekan yang suka curhat gue, intinya ini tidak menyasar pada satu perusahaan tertentu. well, kalau terbaca demikian, udah sih jangan baper, justru saatnya berbenah diri bukan?', 'so, pernah dengar nggak sih kalo dunia perkantoran itu kerja dan 99% drama? bisa dibilang ada benarnya. kerjaan kita kan bisa dibilang benda mati, nggak bernafas. nggak kaya merawat tanaman atau merawat hewan yang masih bisa berinteraksi. tantangannya adalah kerjaan kita yang benda mati itu kan harus dikerjakan oleh manusia, yang mana manusia itu tahu sendiri kan kompleksnya kaya apa. satu perusahaan anggap saja minimal pegawainya orang aja, nah masalah tuh. kepala yang berusaha untuk menjadi satu, bahu-membahu (eh, yakin?) untuk mencapai tujuan utama perusahaan, yaitu mendapatkan keuntungan (plis jangan ajak gue ngomong big message atau mengubah dunia dulu ya, gue orangnya practical banget, itu nanti aja belakangan).', 'kita sebut saja manusia-manusia tersebut mulai mereka yang tukang jilat bos, mereka yang gila kredit, mereka yang adem-adem bae yang penting terima gaji bulanan, mereka yang orangnya business usual banget pokoknya udahlah nggak perlu berkontribusi lebih sama perusahaan, ada juga yang berusaha keras tapi kelihatan lebay karena gak strategis, ada yang gede doang omongnya tapi pas suruh implementasi yawla nihil bos. belum lagi dengan segala politik lobi melobi entah untuk tujuan-tujuan tertentu yang hanya mereka dan gusti allah yang tahu.', 'dari keadaan tersebut, gue berpikir, nih kebanyakan soal office politic tuh nggak diketahui sama mereka yang mungkin fresh graduate atau tipe-tipe yang penting manut aja. lebih parah lagi ada yang suka tidak sadar dia sedang terjebak dalam office politic dan ngikutin arus aja sampai akhirnya tenggelam dan end jadi korban. tanpa dia sadari, dia udah males aja gitu berkontribusi perusahaan tersebut. jadi, gue mau share ini beberapa hal tentang office politic yang kira-kira bisa menjadi kitab pegangan kalian biar plis deh jangan clueless gitu loh jadi orang. iya, ini bukan ngajarin orang jadi jahat ya, tapi justru bisa membuat kalian punya pandangan dan perspektif baru soal kerja kantor yang nggak selalu soal berkarya dan dapat gaji aja. kalo kantor gada office politic (dan drama), wah anak seneng banget pasti karena turnovernya pasti bakal rendah.', 'eh, ini bukan kisah pribadi ya, tapi dari teman. jadi dia cerita startup tempat dia bekerja, bahkan c-level-nya tuh nge-gank gitu loh. contoh ada aja nih anak kesayangan ceo atau kesayangannya cmo, tapi gank ceo ini sama coo dan head apa gitu kaum minoritynya c-level yang lain. entah gue bingung sih pas diceritain, ini sekolahan apa perusahaan kok main gank begitu. intinya hal yang kelihatan kecil begini bisa ngaruh sampai misalnya approval budget lalu approval ide-ide yang mau diluncurkan market. lantas kita nih sebagai cucunguk yang tengah bagaimana dong bersikap? pilihan selalu kembali diri lo, mau jadi ignorant dengan tetap kerja tapi tidak menjilat dan biasa aja atau malah memanfaatkan kesempatan ini untuk mendapatkan nama atau posisi serta apresiasi yang lebih besar. trust me, hal seperti ini ada dan ini termasuk dalam office politic.', 'sebut saja bekerja sebuah perusahaan yang kerjanya kurang lebih seperti customer service. ditawarkan promosi menjadi seorang supervisor karena kerjanya selalu baik, attitude bagus pokoknya jarang cari masalah. dia juga bergaul dengan banyak orang mulai dari level manajer hingga staff, anaknya supel dan semua orang senang sama dia. tapi ada nih salah seorang leader yang melihat bahwa ini main sama orang yang resign yang ternyata punya masalah sama leader ini. padahal ini kan yang tadi bilang, main sama semua orang. akhirnya sejak pertama kali ditanyakan soal promosi, tidak pernah dapat update apapun. usut punya usut sang leader agak malas mengetahui ini masih main sama orang yang punya masalah dan resign ini. pun bingung, dia maunya profesional aja, teman luar kantor sudah teman aja, kenapa harus disangkutpautkan dengan karirnya dalam kantor tersebut. pun hanya bisa bersabar menunggu, padahal excitementnya sudah begitu tinggi waktu dia mendengar bahwa akan dipromosikan. kebingungannya sekarang juga belum terjawab, menurutnya jadi serba salah keadaan yang ada saat ini.', 'alkisah hidup sebuah startup antah berantah nun jauh negeri khayalan. intinya ini prinsipnya “bring deh…” dia seorang problem solver yang melihat bahwa segala sesuatu pasti ada solusinya walaupun prosesnya panjang. semua itu sebetulnya ada modal skill dan pengalaman juga. tapi sayangnya setiap makhluk-makhluk seperti selalu ada cucunguk macam yang merasa dia ingin mendapatkan hal yang sama tapi gada projectnya gitu loh. yang orangnya practical, realistis, anti basa-basi ini ujung-ujungnya jadi korban dan punya backingan apapun. bekerja sebagaimana dia harus bekerja yaitu memberikan kontribusi bagi perusahaan. tapi pasti lah ada orang-orang yang entah kurang piknik hidupnya situ-situ aja yang envy sama dia akhirnya mencari jalan ninja untuk semacam menendang orang ini keluar dengan kekuatan bekingan dari ‘bapak’ yang paling kuat. untungnya pintar dan anti drama, dia memilih mundur terhormat dan membiarkan perusahaan ini beberapa waktu kemudian keadaannya begitu deh progress enggak, mundur juga enggak.', 'nah, dari cerita atas, gue rasa masih banyak cerita-cerita office politic lain yang beredar, yang selalu mengisi ruang-ruang kantin makan siang (sewaktu belum ada corona). bumbu-bumbu pedas yang tersebar lewat obrolan grup tanpa bos serta medium lainnya.', 'office politic sudah ada sejak lama dan akan terus ada. lantas ada tips sih, untuk menghadapi office politic? oh, tentu saja ada. tapi pastinya ini akan semudah itu diimplementasikan semua orang, semua perusahaan karena memang treatmentnya harus case case banget. so, ini beberapa saran gue.', 'dah ah, nulis kepanjangan malah nanti kebanyakan kepala kalian dan nggak bisa memproses. walau office politic menyebalkan, tapi percayalah, karena itu kita bisa tumbuh dan menjadi dewasa dalam dunia kerja, itu juga kalo ambil sisi positifnya ya. good luck!']
'the launch story… and the next level!', 'hi folks:', 'it’s the end 2020 and have been charting what aim manifest the world and releasing resentments that could hold back. now the time clean old wounds and heal; and ready rise.', 'how manifested that intention was via our podcast/radio show our body politic, which has featured top political guests, authors and organizers from sen. tammy duckworth n.k. jemisin dolores huerta. hope you’ll apple podcasts any podcatcher and sign listen.', 'this isn’t just about audio, journalism, even politics. this journey about the difficulty women color have accessing resources, and how despite all get the job done.', 'please read our short summary and you choose, the longer update. join our community listeners and prepared for the journey ahead. are here because you, for you, and with you. thank you.', '___________ the tl;dr version our body politic _______________', 'women color are save our own ass plan america. with the pandemic hitting black, latino and other communities color particularly hard and the devastation what some are calling “female recession,” have had the one were waiting for. black women and women color are bulwarks society, and are consistently under-resourced and poorly quantified.', believe journalism can help change that.', 'so this fall, matter weeks, stood weekly nationally syndicated public radio show, podcast, and community called our body politic. far, our guests have included sen. tammy duckworth, rep. rashida tlaib, hawaii gop chairman shirlene ostrov, macarthur (genius) fellow jemisin and lauded organizer and living legend dolores huerta. our second show featured rep. deb haaland, who will now become the first native american nominated secretary the interior. now, are planning production our next six months episodes. will play key role connecting women color politics, public health and economic news, and will expand into original survey research and sentiment analysis.', pitched our body politic starting late january. when the pandemic hit, interest evaporated. after george floyd was killed, interest sparked, and the stations kqed, kcrw, kpcc and all fundraised, very quickly, stand the show. signed contract with the badass lantigua williams september and had our first episode the air two weeks later!', 'that both success story and failure story. radio show hot launch success. why didn’t have access the resources stand this earlier failure the market fund women color. times, i’ve personally faced steep headwinds industry discrimination well the economic destabilization the industry. but everyday we’re hustling, because know can help improve and innovate ways gaining insights from america’s women color, can keep innovating all the realms touch.', 'we are building consensual, respectful, deep-listening conduit that black, latina, asian-american, native american and multiracial women are seen, heard, understood, and respected key players american democracy, culture and society. you enjoy listening, recognize the value bringing this dialogue public radio and streaming services around the country and around the world, hope you will share the show with your friends, family and colleagues, and support the continuation this critical work lift democracy and civil society.', '________________________________________________', 'the full tour how built this show/community and what comes next', 'so many you helped make the impossible possible.', 'this fall, matter weeks, seeing the civic need inform black women and all women color about politics, stood weekly nationally syndicated public radio show, podcast, and community called our body politic.', 'we’ve been kicking all kinds ass. the show only going get better. plan expand into original survey research and sentiment analysis, with eye playing key role connecting women color politics, public health and economic news through the 2022 midterms, the 2024 presidential election, and beyond.', 'there’s much could say, let focus and limit myself to:', 'if this tl;dr, know that appreciative your support our work.', 'why launched the show our body politic', 'this spring, five people died building crown heights, brooklyn, the first month the pandemic alone. one them, neighbor ruth mazyck corbett, was 76, deacon her church, and loving presence the community. many neighbors are essential workers. crown heights predominately black and working income, and place with lots black homeowners, many whom have been absolutely slammed the economic tsunami the pandemic.', believe knowledge can save lives, which why our body politic does weekly covid update. wish could have stood this show sooner. said someone who became funder, “women color are save our own ass plan” america. meant that the context covid, educating children home, jobs and the economy, and the election. had the one were waiting for. and were and are. black women and women color are bulwarks society, and are consistently under-resourced and poorly quantified. believe journalism can help change that. i’ve also been tracking how racial resentment shapes our politics and how can better journalists cover this critical issue during the age racial reckonings. so….', 'what was like bring our body politic life', '….what had happened was…', pitched our body politic starting late january half hour podcast by/for/about women color, covering politics, community, media and health. when the pandemic hit, interest evaporated. after george floyd was killed, interest sparked. was conversation with for-profit podcast companies, also tweeted out that was pitching this show and wanted bring market, seeking other ideas from twitter followers @farai.', 'and something magical happened. kqed chief content officer holly kernan, who i’d worked with years ago kalw, reached out. started conversations with paul bennun kcrw and kristen muller kpcc. the three stations and all fundraised, very quickly, stand the show. signed contract with the badass lantigua williams september and had our first episode the air two weeks later!', 'that both success story and failure story. radio show hot launch success. why didn’t have access the resources stand this earlier failure the market fund women color. (that said, there are people landscaping how improve the funding pipeline. but any change requires for-profit investors and nonprofit donors step up.)', 'me, i’m accidental entrepreneur. all wanted was write and broadcast the news. but times, i’ve faced steep headwinds industry discrimination well the economic destabilization the industry. investors also favor white and male media founders over women color. had access resources more quickly and easily, could have launched podcast spring 2020, people like neighbors were dying. mention that not lack gratitude for the road we’ve taken, but simple fact. women color media are consistently under-resourced, and result lag behind what are able meeting the information needs our community and the needs all.', 'but doesn’t have that way. our success testament the commitment our funders, partners, and the listener community. thank you for helping get this far.', 'what our body politic doing now', 'everyday we’re hustling. our team producers, sound engineers and bookers maintains relationships with people politics, business and culture; tends those relationships bring you ace guests which far have included sen. tammy duckworth, rep. rashida tlaib, hawaii gop chairman shirlene ostrov, macarthur (genius) fellow jemisin and lauded organizer and living legend dolores huerta. (huerta 90, still works, has children, and regretted the pandemic kept her from going burning man this summer.)', 'what lies ahead for our body politic and the community we’re building', 'right now, our body politic radio show broadcast terrestrially stations coast coast, plus available podcast. so: radio show podcast.', 'we have narrative analysis partner, speak, analyze the voicemails and emails listeners leave response our weekly prompt. our goal build panel regular respondents who, addition other callers, can really give picture what’s the minds women color. (radio show podcast responses narrative analysis…)', 'we also have pending agreement bring academic research partner which does national surveys people color/women color, order bring light the most important issues women color and how choices and sentiment differ race and other factors. (radio show podcast responses narrative analysis survey research….)', 'our goal build consensual, respectful, deep-listening conduit that black, latina, asian-american, native american and multiracial women are seen, heard, understood, and respected key players american democracy, culture and society. era where traditional political polling has frayed and when should question some the uses terms shaping news can help improve and innovate ways gaining insights from america’s women color, can keep innovating all the realms touch.', how you can help continue and strengthen this work', 'our start supporters gave the opportunity produce proof concept and plan run with it. are currently planning production our next six months episodes.if you’ve enjoyed listening, recognize the value bringing this dialogue public radio and streaming services around the country and around the world, hope you will share the show with your friends, family and colleagues. you haven’t listened yet, please tune in, and sign apple podcasts any podcatcher. hope you will share the show with your friends, family and colleagues, and support the continuation this critical work lift democracy and civil society. (we are also accepting larger donations via our fiscal sponsor. feel free reach out ourbodypolitic@protonmail.com.)', 'what kind news you want hear, informed what depth community connection and newsmaker access? we’re here engage deeply with the transformative power women color politics. our collective body politic black women and all women color will the rest.', 'with gratitude,', 'farai']
blumenfeld', 'the word “swastika” derives from sanskrit स्वस्तिक meaning “conducive well-being.” the swastika symbol, (right-facing clockwise) (left-facing, counterclockwise, sauwastika), represents ancient religious icon cultures eurasia.', 'used sign divinity and spirituality indian religions, including hinduism, buddhism, and jainism, the western world was symbol auspiciousness and good luck until the 1930s when german nazis tiled the right-facing figure insignia the so-called aryan race and, thereby, corrupted and perverted its long-standing positive meaning.', 'and the big lie ended the death and injury millions civilians and military service members throughout the world, and the holocaust, terminating the lives millions more.', 'joseph goebbels, nazi reich minister propaganda, tilted his swastika clenched hand when declared ultimately:', 'if you tell lie big enough and keep repeating it, people will eventually come believe it.', 'and what about all the millions who went along with the big lie word and action, from the citizenry throughout the ranks government? what accountability they, should they have the aftermath the lie? what judgment have they and should they still undergo for their culpability?', 'the post-war nuremberg trials brought justice some the high-ranking officials, while others suffered consequences. example the latter category was kurt waldheim, former secretary-general the united nations who became candidate for and won the presidency austria 1986.', 'the world jewish congress disclosed that during wwii, waldheim served german military officer active the balkans when tens thousands jews from salonica were deported auschwitz-birkenau concentration camp poland.', 'henry wallace, progressive democrat and vice president the united states, 1941–1945 under franklin delano roosevelt defined “fascist,” foreign and domestic:', fascist one whose lust for money power,” said, “is combined with such intensity intolerance toward those other races, parties, classes, religions, cultures, regions nations make him ruthless his use deceit violence attain his ends.', 'this big lie, the cornerstone which many countries including the united states were built, was given much oxygen over the past few decades, and especially during the trump regime combust figuratively well literally.', 'those who can make you believe absurdities can make you commit atrocities. voltaire', 'on its surface, the motto “make america great again” appears somewhat reasonable and something achieve one ignorant about u.s. history.', 'the problem, the big lie embedded within the far-right-facing maga insignia, that represents call action: call take the country back mythical age that never existed white christian nativist united states, the german equivalent aryan race where non-aryans must put their “place,” expelled, terminated.', 'the outcome the lie resulted nearly one-half million people dead, collapse the economy, further wage and health gaps between white people and people color, and insurrectionists attempting hold the government hostage well our democratic institutions.', 'and for what? for narcissistic sociopath gain and hold onto power through appealing white grievance politics.', 'the post-trump senate impeachment trial and future civil tribunals may ultimately bring some degree justice trump and possibly some the primary perpetrators under him for the corruption surrounding this presidency. seems perfectly clear that others the colluders and actors perpetuating the big lie will suffer consequences.', 'like kurt waldheim before, some perpetrators remain elected office and others have thrown their metaphoric hats.', 'one such person sarah huckabee sanders:', 'with the radical left now control washington, your governor your last line defense. fact, your governor must the front line. today announce candidacy for governor arkansas,', 'said sanders nearly eight-minute announcement video released monday, january 25, 2021.', '“enabler” the term given those who fail act help abusers. “passive bystander” “bad samaritan” the name for people who are conscious bad actions developing around them but fail intervene even amplify the abuse.', 'enabling and passively standing take many forms, including literally conspiring with abuser sinister plot, contributing the denial process aggressors asserting downplaying the seriousness and making excuses for their behaviors, translating for others what the person “really meant,” downright lying, and on.', 'how many times have heard, “he didn’t mean that way. what really meant say was…” and “you are misunderstanding him.”', 'sarah huckabee goebbels, trump minister propaganda and disinformation, frequently verbally attacked members the press her white house press briefings who posed important questions saw through the big lie challenging the president’s reasoning truthfulness.', 'for example, press briefing january 11, 2018, just hours before more trump’s racist immigration comments, several reporters asked sanders for clarification the president’s early-morning tweets concerning house representatives reauthorization vote the foreign intelligence surveillance act, which they found contradictory and perplexing.', '“house votes controversial fisa act today.’ this the act that may have been used, with the help the discredited and phony dossier, badly surveil and abuse the trump campaign the previous administration and others? donald trump (@realdonaldtrump) january 11, 2018', 'sanders initially responded,', '“we weren’t confused.”', '“his tweet today was contradictory,” said hallie jackson, nbc chief white house correspondent. “it was confusing. just was.”', 'unable offer any reasoned clarification, huckabee goebbels went into personal attack mode: “uh…” she replied, think that the premise your question completely ridiculous and shows the lack knowledge that you have this process.”', often wondered how trump’s enablers could, and still can, sleep night and get back the morning willing degrade and prostrate themselves attacking our democratic institutions and seriously dismantling our country’s standing the world.', 'each time anyone enables abusive action, they keep perpetrators and themselves further from the truth and from help, and they diminish themselves and their integrity more than just bit.', 'throughout his campaign and throughout his term office, donald trump energized his base supporters consistently blaming and attacking the media generally well specific outlets. very brief sampling includes:', '“[journalists are] among the most dishonest human beings earth.”', 'he continually called them “liars” whenever they write stories unflattering him and his administration, though the washington post documented trump making over 30,000 lies office.', 'the failing new york times wrote big, long front-page story yesterday. and was very much discredited, you know.', 'at press conferences, trump told reporters “sit down” when they asked questions did not like, and referred “running war” with the media. even accused “freedom the press” the cause terrorist bombings the u.s.', 'donald trump’s combative press secretary, sarah huckabee sanders who “always [does her] best treat people…respectively…” was asked leave virginia restaurant for defending and attempting justify trump’s divisive policies and constant torrent lies, and for supporting trump’s bigotry.', 'while one should denied service based their views social identities, the would-be autocrat’s lackey got bitter taste trump’s own toxic medicine.', 'at white house press briefings, huckabee sanders reiterated attorney general jeff sessions’ assertion supposed biblical mandates adhere civil law their justification for the separation migrant children from their families they fled terror their native lands.', 'sanders defended the supreme court’s decision favoring the owner masterpiece cakeshop, jack phillips, who refused bake wedding cake for same-sex couple colorado religious grounds. when pressed michael shear, reporter for the new york times, sanders asserted would fine for businesses hang sign their window saying they will not serve lgbtq people.', 'sarah huckabee sanders, the mean girl all had endure middle school, continually violated her vow uphold her evangelical christian beliefs seriously disobeying the 9th commandment: “you shall not bear false witness against your neighbor,” lying through her teeth.', 'where the equivalency the nuremberg trials hold trump’s co-conspirators accountable?', 'why have people like ted cruz, josh hawley, kevin mccarthy, mitch o’connell, marjorie taylor green, matt goetz, jim jordan, rand paul, louis gohmert, and many others not yet been punished some way for their clearly impeachable actions?', 'for others, however, unfortunately lying itself does not constitute punishable offense, least not legally. but perpetuating the big lie should deem anyone running for office unelectable.', 'regrettably, though, many welcome the big lie and vote accordingly.', 'the story was previously published the good men project.', 'dr. warren blumenfeld author the what, the what, and the now what social justice education (peter lang publishers), warren’s words: smart commentary social justice (purple press); editor homophobia: how all pay the price (beacon press), and co-editor readings for diversity and social justice (routledge) and investigating christian privilege and religious oppression the united states (sense), and co-author looking gay and lesbian life (beacon press).']
'[an excerpt this article was published today’s november 2020 issue ethical non-monogamy magazine. you can read the full article with photos and illustrations here: mysexlifewithlola.com]', 'it’s november election year. and not just any election year, but perhaps the most vitriolic, divisive, and ugly election year ever. well, except for 2016. i’ve stated before, this sacred, sexy space ours, this small column the vast expanse contemporary writing, steers clear politics, except for the fact that nothing a-political anymore. writing about sex, celebrating sexuality, and depicting strong, independent, sexually explicit woman like lola down itself political act.', 'but this very politicized climate, nearly impossible provide playground where the ubiquitous partisan battles don’t bleed over the boundaries have created. people the right have appropriated the term “cuck” pejorative for the left. queer men the left have appropriated “proud boys,” the consternation that far-right group. just beneath the surface these slogans and slurs swirl sexual energy, frustration, confusion, and subliminal eroticism misdirected and perverted into hatred and violence.', 'misogyny, racism, sexism, gender identity politics, transphobia, homophobia, xenophobia, and politization polyamory are all interrelated issues, impossible easily separate into isolated questions.', 'we live strange times; times never thought i’d see. the president the united states man married (his third marriage, mind you) woman born different country who had career model, occasionally posing nude and with other nude women homoerotic images. and yet, he’s not radical leftist liberal, but embraced the conservative christian right! has had numerous affairs with porn stars and other women, yet that hasn’t prevented him from gaining the backing the bible belt. but his exoneration the religious right has not been equally applied. those who work the sex industry were not similarly embraced given the same shame-free-pass the president.', 'in 2016 the first female presidential candidate was eviscerated, mainly for wearing pantsuit. yet, 2020, between hope hicks, kayleigh mcenany, ivanka trump, omarosa manigault newman, mercedes schlapp, lindsay walters, zina bash, the first lady, and others, sometimes difficult tell the difference between the white house and the playboy mansion. perhaps that trump’s appeal many; fills the void left the death hugh hefner.', 'and all this tumult and turmoil, not coincidentally, floats the surface the wake eight years african american man occupying the white house.', mention our current and past political theater preamble confronting porn/erotica trope ubiquitous and with long history that the “lolita” nymphomaniac figure. speak the so-called “mandingo myth.” this deep-seated belief, whose pedigree can traced far back ancient greece and egypt, holds that african men wield sexual appendages that dwarf those fair-skinned europeans. throughout the ages, the image the hugely hung black man has been perpetuated well perverted order promote racist agenda: the longer the penis, the more bestial the sex-drive, the less human the man and thus the greater the threat white society, especially its womenfolk. (see mind its own: cultural history the penis, david friedman, chapter iii, “the measuring stick.”)', 'over the centuries, the long black appendage has been compared priapus (that is, the male fertility god), donkey, stallion, buck, and even pre-adam serpent the garden eden responsible for eve’s seduction and the fall. throughout the ages, but most prominently america from reconstruction onward, this archetype the african american man’s exceptional endowment has been the focus white fear and fetish, engendering multiple myths, none them ending well for the african american man. this theme almost comically depicted the various king kong films, but most explicitly the 1976 version. plot: the petrox oil company seeks plunder remote island its oil. they find natural resources make their venture profitable, but they find and trap king kong, preternaturally large black ape. they return the u.s. with their unusual cargo. however, kong has fallen love with dwan scantily clad, blonde woman played jessica lange). unable allow such unfathomable relationship, kong killed. (in the original 1933 version, climbs the giant phallus, the empire state building. the ’76 remake, climbs the world trade center buildings, thus doubling the phalli.) the allegory quite transparent: white colonialists set out for raw materials, they return with slaves from africa whose unusual size threatens their white women and must killed.', year earlier, 1975, the same myth was played out, only without the allegorical trappings, the film mandingo, based the 1957 novel the same name, from which the “mandingo myth” gets its label, though its predecessors white western mythology predate millennia.', 'unfortunately, today still find this trope used both the focus taboo fetishes (“blacked” porn, which fetishizes both black men with large cocks and white, usually blonde and petit, women) and phobias for political ends. for instance, 2017, enrique tarrio, the leader the proud boys, posted tweet which asked white women would more willing donate $20 trump’s campaign walk past group black men while wearing sundress. (the daily mail, 10/1/2020, “leader the proud boys the state director latinos for trump”)', 'in today’s tribal public sphere, there little can agree upon, but one thing that unimpeachable is, david friedman says, the one place where race and sex (and can add politics) converge the black penis.', 'the long black dong the symbol white, male fragility. signifies the fear masculine inadequacy and the homoerotic desire for sexual prowess. both symbol and signifier are pointers and the thick, strong, dark schlong frequently depicted pointing the helpless, weak, innocent white blonde. copulation contrast. this ubiquitous trope penetrates deep the psyche our culture.', 'just black men are often reduced their primal virility exemplified the penis, too women are subtly and explicitly made into medium for the message communicated the patriarchal culture. recent memory, the collective unconscious probably recalls images from silent black-and-white films damsel-in-distress tied the railroad tracks the sinister mustachioed villain. this image emblematic archetype that transcends time and space: the bound female. ancient stories span the globe women tied sacrificial victims, concubines, slaves from the abduction sita the ramayana the afore mentioned dwan king kong and, course, princess leia her famous jabba the hut scene return the jedi (1983) project and perpetuate the idea women victims need hero.', 'from nude nearly nude women dancing cages clubs, raves, and music concerts, taylor swift reenacting the railroad scene “mean,” this trope conspicuously depicted and sexualized, but there are far more nuanced ways sending the same message. what the message? women are weak, needy, helpless, and their power, like prometheus (an example gender inversion the architype) under wraps. notice, you will, women’s fashion, from undergarments gowns. what recurring theme? straps, bows, knots, strings, and all manner imagery suggesting restraint while simultaneously revealing skin. beyond that, almost every article clothing designed depict weakness, vulnerability, and impotence. watch your local national news, for instance. how are the men dressed? buttoned shirts, ties, long sleeve jackets revealing the least skin possible. they are formidable, wearing body armor. and the women? blouses cut the shoulder, plunging necklines, form-fitting soft colored tops. imagine for moment what you would think male news anchor reporting halter-top made thin, silky material.', 'beyond the blouses, there are the skirts. dresses were, perhaps, originally designed conceal the shape the woman hidden beneath all the folds and flourishes. but today, dresses and skirts are designed inhibit freedom movement, conceal little possible, and leave the woman wearing them vulnerable the inadvertent upskirt.', 'working our way down, next arrive women’s footwear. high heels keep woman off balance. not only they prevent any aggressive action, they inhibit flight. women’s dress shoes, for the most part, make them helpless victim the face any danger. beyond that, they continue the ligature leitmotif. straps, bows, chords, all depict the female foot shibari shoe.', 'it’s important recall that liberating oneself from the cultural baggage one inherits virtue merely being born into particular time and place not accomplished merely adopting the opposite position. the dialectical structure, inhabiting the antithesis merely reaffirms the thesis. does nothing diminish the power the thesis. rather, twisting free the rigid and possibly oppressive cultural constraints tricky and subtle art. requires first understanding the nature one’s servitude and then becoming master it.', 'lola means exempt from our culture’s conventions any more than you however, she does like play with the tropes and taboos just the way that good composer doesn’t merely adhere the rules the times, but will surprise and delight contorting them unexpected patterns.', 'of course, our relationship there the patent hotwife cuck/stag bull roles played. but emphasize the play that inherent any roleplaying. has her soft spot for knots (of all variety) and strappy heels, dresses, bras, panties, and even corsets. she also has her wet spot for bbc. but also delights her wear her strap-on, wield her cock, and fuck like man. call her switch you wish. she also oogles and drools over the many fan photos she gets from black bulls endowed with length, girth, and heft she has rarely met the flesh. but she also loves her male trans fans who send photos themselves their wives’ panties cumming their pantyhose. for, when comes sex, the one rule that holds that nothing essentially anything. existence precedes essence, the existentialists mantra goes, meaning, before had determined male/female, man/woman, straight/queer, black/white, there were just people doing stuff. their names, definitions, categories, and expectations norms all came later.', 'these observations are meant neither condemn nor condone the complex cultural code with regard bbc bdsm manifests veiled, seemingly innocuous symbols such popular movies and fashion. rather, this thought piece more along the lines semiotics (the study signs and symbols culture) than cultural critique. signs and symbols perform function; they point something. this piece, the sign/symbol with which began was the black penis, which is, innately and ironically, also pointer. perhaps pointing our radical possibility for the future. simply wanted point that out.']
onald trump persists his effort bring down the republican party–and the republic itself–through his reprehensible antics and despicable demagoguery, necessary make abundantly clear all and sundry just how vile trump is. fortunately, george will for the job:', 'every sulfurous belch from the molten interior the volcanic trump phenomenon injures the chances republican presidency. after donald trump finishes plastering snarling face conservatism, any republican nominee will face dauntingly steep climb reach even the paltry numbers that doomed mitt romney.', 'it perhaps quixotic try distract trump’s supporters with facts, which their leader, who stickler for dignity, considers beneath him. still, consider these:', 'the white percentage the electorate has been shrinking for decades and will about points smaller 2016 than 2012. 2008, barack obama became the first president elected while losing the white vote double digits. 2012, hispanics, the nation’s largest minority, were for the first time double-digit (10 percent) portion the electorate. white voters were nearly percent romney’s vote. 1988, george h.w. bush won percent the white vote, which translated into 426 electoral votes. twenty-four years later, romney won percent the white vote and just 206 electoral votes. lost the nonwhite vote points, receiving just percent it. the republicans’ 2016 nominee does not better than romney did among nonwhite voters, will need percent the white vote, which was last achieved ronald reagan when carrying states 1984. romney did even slightly worse among asian americans the fastest-growing minority than among hispanics. evidently, minorities generally detected republican ambivalence, even animus, about them. this was before trump began receiving rapturous receptions because obliterates inhibitions about venting hostility.', 'trump indifferent those conservative tenets (e.g., frugality: welcomed obama’s stimulus) which not hostile (e.g., property rights: adored the supreme court’s kelo decision vastly expanding government’s power eminent domain). so, trump’s appeal must derive primarily from his views about immigration. including legal immigration, concerning which favors “pause” unspecified duration.', 'some supporters simply find trump entertainingly naughty. others, however, have remarkable cognitive dissonance. they properly execrate obama’s executive high-handedness that expresses progressivism’s traditional disdain for the separation powers that often makes government action difficult. but these same trumpkins simultaneously despise gop congressional leaders because they not somehow jettison the separation powers and work conservatism’s unimpeded will from capitol hill.', '[. .]', 'republicans are the party growth, they are superfluous. the other party relishes allocating scarcities full employment for the administrative state.', 'trump assumes zero-sum society, where one person’s job another’s loss. hence his rage against other nations’ “stealing” jobs “our” jobs.', 'to sure, not enough point out just how revolting trump is. necessary well point out that his supporters are collective prize either:', 'to the extent that donald trump’s presidential campaign about any actual issue, about opposition immigration. trump has, among other things, proposed deporting million unauthorized immigrants currently the united states, expressed support for reducing legal immigration levels, jeered immigrant “anchor babies,” and called for end birthright citizenship, even though constitutionally required.', 'trump’s slogan, the catchall phrase that binds his scattershot campaign together, “make this country great again.” combination with his immigration platform, the clear implication the slogan that america has, over the years, become not great place, and immigrants are least one reason perhaps the primary reason why.', 'nativism the core donald trump’s campaign; one the keys his appeal. and amongst his supporters and admirers, that aggressive nativism often shades into outright racism.', 'read the whole thing. lie down with dogs, and well, you know the rest. some might unwilling blame trump for the racism his supporters. not unwilling; should surprise precisely one that trump’s nativist, hate-filled campaign would attract racists it. after all, are talking about candidate whose first response the beating homeless hispanic man two thugs–one whom “was inspired” trump’s anti-immigration language–was say that will say that people who are following are very passionate. they love this country and they want this country great again. they are passionate.”', 'and course, such response not presidential. fact, it’s not even human.', 'donald trump and his supporters don’t belong the republican party. they belong more properly the ranks organizations like isil. they are both buffoonish and barbaric, and should laughed out any civilized political gathering–especially political gatherings that seek choose the next president the united states.', 'like loading…']
'on regular basis curate some the most interesting pieces content have seen about messenger and messaging general, bots, digital marketing, and fan engagement. here are some things you may have missed…', 'jacqueline feldman begins tell her story the new yorker first stating very important fact; something she noticed when her job became design the personality chatbot called kai: most bots out there don’t really have personality.', 'and the longer she worked making the kai bot “friendly but authoritative, engaging but not creepy”, the more she realized certain truths about creating character for bot. for starters, she noted that:', 'chatbots must agreeable the point obsequiousness.', 'but what really struck her was the conclusion she reached: all assistants (like cortana and siri and alexa) have female names and female voices. the bottom line here being that they all exude femininity different aspects.', '…in the united states, the method for insuring that technology speaks without giving offense has been make woman', 'this problematic because:', 'by creating interactions that encourage consumers understand the objects that serve them women, technologists abet the prejudice which women are considered objects.', 'it turns out that a.i. systems pretending female are often subjected the same sorts online harassment women. her opinion, the solution this problem realize that bots don’t need human. according jacqueline “we don’t need make our technologies conform the gender binary human societies order like them.”', 'even though this piece was published about year ago, this topic extremely relevant nowadays given how our society becoming more and more aware about harassment and gender dynamics.', 'www.newyorker.com', 'recently, texting turned 25! testing has transformed the way communicate with one another over the years. this probably why messaging has survived long and has successfully evolved with the technological era.', 'dr john lenarcic, lecturer rmit’s school business and logistics who looks the social and ethical aspects technology, says that text message hybrid form communication.', '“it’s cross between writing and speech you write abbreviated fashion,” says. “it another stage evolution language.”', 'www.theage.com.au', 'recently, there’s been lot discussion when comes conversational interfaces, messenger bots, etc. people have had mixed experiences with these bots and that understandable since we’re still the early days bots.', 'however, regardless what anybody says, undeniable that messaging marketing slowly but successfully taking over the world. and there are few things you should aware when comes bot marketing before you start putting your strategy together.', 'www.forbes.com', 'the latest news the music/tech world that apple acquiring shazam. exciting stuff!', '“although apple hasn’t shared confirmed any plans regarding what plans with shazam’s technology, it’s easy imagine how the service could fit into apple music. shazam allows users follow their favorite artists and see what they’re listening to”', 'time.com', 'liked this story? show with standing ovation below! jk, even just 👏will ;)', 'or maybe help spread the social media and you still don’t have your own bot yet, you can start now, just takes few clicks!']
'like most american women, i’ve been prepared defend myself against sexual assault and rape. know “never take your eye off your drink” and “don’t walk alone night” and “if you have to, put your key between your fingers use weapon.” even kid, was taught not talk adult men didn’t know. the message has been very clear: there are predators out there ready take advantage you, alert and prepared.', 'i’ve taken role self-protector seriously. learned self-defense moves from friend training cop and felt ready take down assailant matter their size they had weapon. therapist worked with taught repeat the numbers “911” wouldn’t forget emergency. sounds silly, but she said i’d shocked the number people who get distraught and dial “411,” the number for local directory assistance.', 'despite the years effort and preparation, when was sexually assaulted 2005, did not defend myself. did not use key weapon. did not disarm the weapon held against neck. did not dial 911. didn’t even scream move. froze and complied.', 'the people who had guided and instructed how respond assault neglected explain how body and mind would respond. don’t blame them, because they didn’t know. practical sense, it’s true that training can prepare people defend themselves and escape, but when comes cognitive functions, it’s not given. and most people have clue how the brain functions because basic neuroscience isn’t core curriculum.', 'understanding how the brain responds emotional stimuli like fear would have saved over decade guilt and anxiety.', 'to graduate high school most u.s. states, you must understand cellular respiration, the sexual anatomy flower, and how calculate the hydrogen ion concentration for strong acid, but you don’t need understand what controls your ability function healthy, happy, well-rounded person.', 'understanding how the brain responds emotional stimuli like fear would have saved over decade guilt and anxiety. might might not have allowed respond any differently assault, but certainly would have changed how felt about response it. fact, would have changed the entire narrative surrounding the event things like victim-blaming and fear reporting.', 'when society expects you say and defend yourself and you spend your life training protect yourself but then you comply during assault, you’re left with immense shame and devastating guilt about how your body responded. but imagine police officer, judge, victims’ hotline advocate with understanding how the brain really functions during trauma. we’d live world far more compassionate about how survivors actually react during assaults.', 'in offering scientific explanation why froze during assault and smiled afterward, i’m hoping help people whether they’ve been assaulted not understand why this response common. and want those who have been assaulted feel less alone and have less shame.', 'trigger warning: details sexual assault', 'during senior year college, directed low-budget, one-act play. fund the production, approached local businesses ask they wanted purchase program advertisements and asked friends recommend locally-owned businesses where they had connection. some sorority members heard about request and raved about salon owner down the street from the school. “he’s the best!” they said. “he cuts everyone’s hair the sorority. you’re going love him! book appointment with him!”', called the salon owner, told him about production, and asked could set appointment discuss advertising. agreed discuss over haircut, which said he’d give great discount on.', 'the following week, arrived the salon and was surprised see completely empty customers and hairdressers, except for one frustrated stylist cleaning her station and the owner. the owner led his chair and draped cutting gown around shoulders. the mirror front me, saw the stylist roll her eyes and leave. the tension between them was apparent, but what concerned most was that was then completely alone with someone didn’t really know anything about.', 'the owner followed the stylist she left and locked the salon’s front door behind her. came back and began cut hair. there was something aggressive about his presence, the type feeling you get around sleazy guy who will anything get what wants used-car salesman vibe. didn’t ask how wanted hair cut styled and instead went with attitude know what will look good you. you don’t.”', 'as hair fell the cutting gown, wiped off. was peculiar gesture that gave pause. tried remember all haircuts the past. had other stylists brushed the hair off gown too? couldn’t recall time when they did. his touch became more persistent and began gravitate further down body neck, shoulders, chest, and then breast.', interrogated myself harshly: “why didn’t you leave? why didn’t you scream?”', kept asking myself, “is doing what think he’s doing? purposely touching breast?” first, convinced myself that was small-chested that just wasn’t aware where his hand was landing. continued stare myself the mirror, the image broad man behind me, his pelvis resting against the back the chair.', 'before had time process what was happening, paused from cutting hair. rested the sharp shears his right hand against the base neck. his left hand continued brush the cutting gown. there was hair left the gown, but persisted. worked his hand slowly down the front the gown, groping breasts several times before moving down toward stomach, thighs, and between legs. the gown prevented him from making full contact with genitals, but swept his hand along that area several times, applying pressure the spots where the gown made contact with body. his body was still pressed against the back the chair, his chest pressing against head.', continued sit, frozen, smiling politely, witnessing the assault the mirror, feeling the cold metal the sharp shears against neck. was matter minutes, but felt eternal. when was satisfied, finished cutting hair and told the price. never discussed the advertisement he’d said he’d wanted purchase. reached bag, handed him cash, smiled, said “thank you,” and walked the door, which unlocked, allowing leave.', 'when got car, was still frozen, mechanical, cold. wasn’t until drove away that returned myself and began cry hysterically. house, crawled into bathtub and shivered and cried for hours. mind played out the scene over and over again his hands body, the heat his body against mine, giving him money and thanking him.', interrogated myself harshly: “why didn’t you leave? why didn’t you scream? why didn’t you take the scissors out his hand and threaten him? why did you pay him? why did you thank him? why didn’t you just tell him stop?”', 'believing fight flight our only response threatening situations makes easy victim-blame.', 'part felt like victim, part felt like idiot, and part wanted justice. listened that part. called local rape and sexual assault hotline and told them, detail, what happened. told them had never filed police report before accused anyone crime and that was and needed some help. the response the advocate gave triggered the same powerless feelings felt the salon chair. she said, “there’s nothing you can do. there were witnesses, and you have evidence. you could file police report, but they won’t anything about except ask for his side the story. they have reason believe you.”', was infuriated and devastated. called some close family members and told them what had happened; they only echoed what the advocate had said. the next day, had rehearsal for play. told everyone the cast and crew. they were sympathetic but also didn’t have any advice about what actions could take.', 'every time someone confirmed what the rape advocate told me, heard voice that said, “you allowed this happen. you let happen.”', imagined what would have happened had fought back: “would have tried hurt me? that would have been evidence, right? had screamed and someone had heard me, they would witness, right? what had kicked him the nuts the way out? that would have been defense, right?” every scenario that conjured evidence and witnesses was hands, based actions. but action during the assault had been remain still and politely smile, allow him what wanted with body. why?', 'most people know the phrase “fight flight.” we’ve come rely explanation for our behavior times high stress. the idea was first introduced walter cannon 1915. observed that provoked animals released adrenaline, which gave their body the extra energy needed escape from attack their predators. proposed that human bodies work the exact same way. some ways, was right, but we’ve made many advancements and discoveries the past century that shed light our very complex response stress. turns out that humans don’t just run fight when they’re scared.', propose get rid this phrase entirely. it’s false idea about instinct.', 'believing fight flight our only response threatening situations makes easy victim-blame. becomes natural think that we’re only programmed fight run away, then anyone who doesn’t clearly wasn’t very threatened. what scientists and psychologists now understand that the brain has very intricate system self-preservation. the first line defense certain times not immediately pump adrenaline but slow down the prefrontal cortex.', 'think your brain like electric grid. during survival situation, you don’t lose total power your prefrontal cortex the area the brain responsible for higher cognitive functions like decision-making, planning, and communicating emotion but does start run backup generators with certain non-essential functions shut down conserve energy.', 'my prefrontal cortex was offline, and didn’t have choice express emotions because brain had redirected power from that system.', 'this means when you’re faced with threatening situation, you lose power the part your brain that can help you consciously decide what you should next, understand how the situation will affect your future, make detailed complex escape plan, tell your abuser that you’re not okay. can happen instantly and often without your control. different response can re-trained, but takes more than people just telling you defend yourself when the time comes.', 'the brain takes that extra power energize other parts deemed more necessary for survival, like the amygdala, which have conscious control over. receives input from various parts the brain and then sends action signals other parts. it’s like middle management with tenure. when your amygdala receives the input that you’re threatening situation, sends out the troops necessary. but does far more than just trigger adrenaline; works tandem with the hippocampus assess the type threat and respond the most appropriate way. the hippocampus your functional memory bank the intelligent data storage the amygdala pulls from figure out it’s got security protocol already place for the type threat.', 'depending the threat assessment, several things can happen your brain and body, and this why the oversimplicity the fight flight response outdated way thinking. it’s possible you will flooded with superhero levels adrenaline that make you physically stronger and faster than you’ve ever been your life. it’s also possible that your brain will see way out and then activate your parasympathetic nervous system, which decreases heart rate and muscle tone, effectively freezing you place.', 'and you’ve ever had similar threatening experience, your amygdala and hippocampus might deploy remembered security protocol you previously created cope that involves fawning, complying, even laughing. these reactions are typically built over time people who experienced trauma child. their brains have developed incredibly clever systems appease abusers and avoid life-threatening situations.', was abused very early age trusted figure. survive that situation, had “be good girl.” brain developed very smart fawning system that allowed protect myself appeasing abuser. was not control this programming nor was able make the conscious decision choose otherwise.', 'when sat down the salon chair empty locked room with sharp scissors against neck, brain didn’t give the option fight back. was the mercy programming which meant froze, smiled, and politely left before getting car and breaking down.', 'my prefrontal cortex was offline, and didn’t have choice express emotions because brain had redirected power from that system. parasympathetic nervous system weakened muscles and decreased blood flow such extreme that was not able physically move respond. that moment, was the same little girl who had been abused before with the survival memory “be good girl.”', 'my silence was not consent, nor was the fake smile smeared across face. paying abuser for haircut and thanking him walked out the door was not approval forgiveness his actions. was survival programming, and doesn’t make weak him any less guilty.', 'we cannot continue rely outdated assumptions about how people should respond threatening situations. it’s imperative that teach ourselves and others how the brain works, especially during moments trauma and survival. victim-blaming and shaming must end. we’re smarter and better than this.']
'almost two years ago, wrote about being sexually assaulted male friend let’s call him “brad” who stuck his fingers vagina when was drunk. since then, i’ve done lot “personal work,” they say, and i’ve basically reached place peace about the whole thing. but, for me, the final step was unexpected; was understanding own capacity hurt other people.', 'when began dating again, this one memory kept resurfacing for way that was very disruptive. was memory drunkenly making out with girl when had one hands her leg, and was slowly moving her thigh. “oh, no,” she said, and removed hand and continued making out. for months, this memory kept resurfacing, and wondered— why this memory coming up? did nothing wrong, listened her when she said no. i’m not like brad, told myself. didn’t assault her. didn’t actually put fingers her vagina.', 'i’m not like brad. i’m not like brad. i’m not like brad.', 'yet, some small part couldn’t help but wonder; i’d had two more drinks, could have been like brad? that girl and had been drunk brad and had been, could have assaulted her?', kept searching and searching for some clue, some concrete piece evidence, that would exonerate and kept coming short. and, eventually came terms with very difficult belief now have; was simply circumstance that separated and brad. there was deep evil his heart, nothing terrible about him and nothing good about me. had the same capacity assault someone that did, but the circumstances the nights question led two different outcomes.', 'once accepted potential culpability, began wonder myself, what were the circumstances that made that event feel fucked up? why did that night keep coming for was working sexual trauma?', 'one the first things observed, that this girl had been very conventionally attractive. “straight hot,” the un-pc would say, perhaps skinny, blonde and femme would cover it. and… wasn’t really that into her. but wanted hook with her anyway because thought would make awesome. could like, casually drop that i’d hooked with her male friends and blow their minds. and even never told anyone about it, i’d know i’d done it, and this would feel like being “successful” some way.', 'i’m sorry say, this has been repeated feature sex life. any time “straight hot” blonde chick wants hook with (which has maybe happened, like, times) *always* for it, and basically never get turned on. but get such ego boost from being asked that roll with it.', 'and, part what was creepy about that night, that was hooking with that girl for social status, not connect with her. course was tuned out what she was feeling sexually; was completely numbing own sexual desires pursuit ego gratification. wanted the feelings success that would come after hooking with her, but wasn’t much interested the feelings connection that came during hooking up. wanted fuck her quickly possible and get over with just could say that i’d done it.', 'this revelation helped answer one the most painful question that had been haunting me; how can men sexually gratified when i’m hurting? how could sexual assaulter have gotten any gratification from fingering when was drunk was blacking out? how could come inside after told him didn’t want have sex? why did people get angry with when asked stop sexual activity that was hurting me?', 'how could people enjoy, and demand, being sexual with body when they could knew was hurting me?', 'the answer, believe, that they were pursuit ego gratification. they were disconnected from what both were feeling, and were instead focused the “accomplishment” hooking with me. the gratification they wanted wasn’t the gratification connecting with another human, but rather achieving something the eyes society.', 'understanding this helped come terms with own feelings worthlessness and unlovability. for many years, looked around other people other women and asked myself, “what does she have that don’t?” why does someone love her, and why does one loved me? and, think these feelings were caused the visceral experience callousness, and times anger and resentment, partners what were supposed “the most” intimate moments life. some part felt like there was something wrong with that led other people being cruel when they were supposed being nice me.', 'but, when remember that night with the pretty blonde girl, it’s now easy see there was nothing wrong with her. don’t believe she was unlovable; just that, that moment, was selfishly focused own ego that was unable show genuine affection for her. even didn’t anything her without consent, think what did was bad for her. think hurt her. she would have sensed wasn’t really into her when were making out, and that probably added her own feelings worthlessness and unlovability. did her what many men have done me, and for that, truly sorry.', 'one thing that #metoo hasn’t addressed what when realize that are the guilty party? what when remember incidents our past when weren’t good people they really deserved? because, well before get “illegal” sexual behaviors, there are whole slew “harmful” sexual behaviors which many (most?) are guilty of.', feel somewhat frustrated with our current demonization sexual assaulters, because reminds the way kept telling myself “i’m not like brad.” reeks societal denial. pull out the worst, most over the top cases high profile men who assaulted many victims over years, and demand justice without ever investigating our own culpability participation corrupt system. retain comfortable ignorance our own attitudes and own complicity vilifying the most odious secretly assuring ourselves we’re not like them.', 'one male facebook friends noticed that nearly all his female friends were participating #metoo, and wondered; have most men participated act harassment, are small number men harassing lot women? assumed was most likely the later, assumption backed with these high profile cases that target many people.', 'however, think most *have* participated the culture sexual harassment one way another. there not sharp divide between the “evil” men the headlines and mostly innocent public; rather there spectrum that will all find ourselves on.', 'common ways believe many people participate and perpetuate sexual assault culture:', 'my main frustration with too, that it’s making harder and harder. ultimately, culture, we’re going have admit the things have done wrong. we’re going have admit the mistakes have made, and examine the causes and conditions that led make them. we’re going have own the pain caused other people, and this going involve feeling the pain that comes with fully acknowledging how you have hurt people.', 'we’re going have stop pretending the sexual assaulters are out there, that they’re committed horrible people with horrible minds and repulsive sexual urges. sexual assault natural and obvious extension our culture. natural extension values that all have internalized.', 'and, we’re going have figure out what about that. right now, seem punish assault calling people out social media, shaming them, and make them un-hirable (if can’t arrest them.) but, are going that everyone? what about the people who only did once, long time ago? what about the people who are combinations victims and perpetrators? what about the people who did things that are kind sketchy, but not fully criminal?', 'our current methods correction can’t applied the entire population, yet our entire population culpable this problem (which, why basically *all women* have experienced it.) must stop trying confirm our own innocence, but rather consider the ways that we’re contributing the problem. because this very difficult task, recommend starting with the easiest questions.', 'have you ever looked away, dismissed, someone’s experience sexual pain even little bit? even just your head? even online?', 'have you ever felt flattered by, craved, the attention conventionally attractive people that you weren’t personally actually attracted to?', 'have you ever called women “hot” way connecting with straight men?', 'have you ever shamed non conventionally attractive people?', 'have you ever shamed anyone for being sexually inexperienced virgin?', 'have you ever shamed anyone for having non-standard sexual desires?', 'i’m guilty most these (at some time life) and usually because wanted social acceptance. part what try now accept wide variety people socially, help mitigate the conditions that would lead them being cruel other people. truly fighting rape culture will require large changes across the board. will require being nice adolescent boys. will require creating space for non-sexual kind femininity.', 'it will require culture that grants basic respect and dignity all people, just because they are people.']
'here’s the thing: i’ve hooked with lot men. starting high school, when discovered alcohol, frequently found myself dark bedrooms with boys had just met. later, became woman, they became men. were both frequently inebriated. and own addictions got worse, did the states inebriation.', could probably give you rough figure promiscuity for statistics’ sake (at the mortal embarrassment husband and family), but let’s just say was lot. some them liked; some them were just there. some them were nice; some them clearly could have cared less about me.', 'but out all those dudes all those drunken, drugged-out nights, only two them assaulted attempted assault me. you know why?', 'because assaulting someone isn’t normal.', 'most men don’t grow thinking it’s okay hold girl down party and cover her mouth when she tries scream. most men don’t think it’s okay expose themselves and try make woman touch their penis. most men don’t those things because they aren’t sexual predators. it’s mental health disorder, and it’s criminal.', 'in formative years texas the 1990s, “boys being boys” meant they might attempt get second base, third base, even home run, but whenever told them that didn’t want something (no matter how much had drunk smoked even snorted), they responded with, “that’s cool.” sometimes they had the bathroom take care themselves, they just left. sometimes they were brats about it. but most times, they would take “no” for answer, and just went back what were doing, whatever pleasant-enough activity had mutually agreed often snuggling and passing out going through collection and sharing our favorite music, which the ’90s always seemed the backup activity sex.', 'they knew the difference between right and wrong. and matter how many keg stands they had done, they knew that girl woman asked leave, told them stop, didn’t want take off her shirt, pants, underwear, they were supposed respect that. matter how much she had drunk. matter what she might have done with their best friend the weekend before. because matter how much they might have wanted get laid, they didn’t want hurt someone else it.', 'eighty-one percent women (and percent men) say they have been sexually assaulted, but lack statistics the percentage men (or women) who say they have been perpetrators said assaults. yet it’s not surprising when one man gets accused multiple women. that’s because percent women aren’t being assaulted percent men. the percentage sexual predators far, far smaller. and that’s not conspiracy—it’s statistics.', 'the first time boy assaulted was high school party. was popular football player private school, and was the slightly artsy girl who listened too much tori amos. “david” invited outside his car have cigarette. started kissing behind his jeep wrangler (because course), and then, with force that took surprise, pushed onto the ground. before could say anything, was top lay the street. put his forearm over chest tried get his penis out his pants.', 'he was drunker than was, punched him hard the face and got up, yelling him. quickly jumped up, his penis out. was apologetic and acted like was putting his dick away. offered walk back the party, and though had just tried attack the middle the street, didn’t want him not like me, agreed.', 'though walked away physically unharmed that night, saw what sexual predators looked like. they look nice. they look handsome. they look entitled.', 'we started walk back, but then grabbed arm and tried again get touch his penis. that point, couldn’t get away. was telling him let me, and kept saying, “just hold it. just hold it.”', 'another guy, “jacob” (an even more popular football player and current donald trump supporter, might add), walked and stopped him, asking, “hey man, what are you doing her?”', 'david let me, jacob called me, “kristen, are you okay?” hadn’t even realized knew name. was shaken, but okay seemed fair enough. jacob saw two girls and asked them help while cornered his friend and began lecturing him, “what the fuck wrong with you?”', didn’t stick around hear more.', can only hope “david” were the running for the supreme court today lifetime appointment), would have the strength tell story. because though walked away physically unharmed that night, saw what sexual predators looked like.', 'they look nice. they look handsome. they look entitled.', 'some them belong therapy, and some belong prison. but they don’t belong lifetime appointments positions power. and they are not the majority; they are very sick minority.', 'sexual assault not rite passage because the fact that most men don’t participate it. only sexual predators do.', 'most the men have met life have been the type who walked and said, “hey man, what are you doing her?” wasn’t because they were heroes, though the trump-supporting football player that night texas definitely comes off one. they were just decent people. most people even the ones who voted for trump think they have support supreme court nominee brett kavanaugh are decent people.', 'they don’t actually want assault women. they see woman friend, equal, someone worthy their respect and her own dignity. matter what they believe politically, when decent men the majority men are nominated for major public office, one comes forward say, “that man tried make hold his penis college.”', 'sexual assault not rite passage because the fact that most men don’t participate it. only sexual predators do.', 'we those people favors when offer them positions power; they don’t belong charge. they need taken the corner yard, looked squarely the face, and asked, “what the fuck wrong with you?”', 'sexual assault isn’t every guy’s story. and needs stop being every woman’s.']
mately three and half years ago, former male friend raped apartment. it’s sickeningly common story. part how coped with was through minimizing, through diminishing the story could shrink into not being real. i’d like able say that don’t that anymore, but the reality that, i’ve processed and healed, i’m working not doing that anymore.', 'there are many ways think about the cost rape: the cost fear, the cost friend, the cost panic attacks, the cost three years life, the cost learning love and trust again, the cost learning forgive myself for something that wasn’t fault. the mundane “cash credit?”-type costs. did not press charges file police report, these costs simply reflect what have spent the aftermath grieving, processing, and working through. legal costs can outrageous for many survivors, but didn’t pursue that process. also, was very, very lucky with health-related costs.', 'disclaimer: didn’t document these exactly, everything listed approximate. also, this subset the costs, and the list nowhere close exhaustive.', 'blow dryer, $20i never considered pressing charges, and after left showered. had really long hair the time, had somewhere couple hours, and had blow dryer. remember standing the cvs, largely numb, stumped options. eventually chose, since was running out time. still have the blow dryer. works quite well.', 'morning after pill/exam, $40i try kind myself, remember that was dealing with trauma. still cringe, though, when remember that took more than hours planned parenthood for the morning after pill wasn’t birth control the time, and didn’t use condom) and tests make sure didn’t contract hiv another std/sti.', 'personal day, $240i tried into work that day but felt too sick from the medication.', 'weekend trip, $500i couldn’t stand being city for time. took weekend trip nyc; only memory this trip watching several pay-per-view movies hotel room and going the frick collection. journaled lot. still remember one entry where wrote, “can you raped without there being rapist?” even then knew the answer, but didn’t want believe guy had thought was friend could become something different.', 'plays and concerts, $200i dragged friends and co-workers numerous events, trying fill evenings and weekends, and exhaust myself. only told one why; she was amazingly supportive.', 'therapy, $120i only did this for six months. don’t like talk about personal things with strangers, and found therapy really, really hard. work reimbursed for all costs except transportation.', 'self-care, $7,500my long-term healing and processing has largely been through expensive hobby that challenges mentally and physically, and provides complete distraction whenever need get out head.', 'clothes, $50i did not consciously replace the outfit wore that night after threw out, but guess it’s probably fair game consider the next outfit purchased more less replacement one.', 'moving (replacement apartment), $1500so, the thing about being raped your apartment is, you suddenly don’t want there. ever. panic attacks and flashbacks got pretty bad, and when had the chance move larger and cheaper place, felt like had been saved. that said, moving always pricey: first and last months’ rent, boxes, movers, never getting all your deposit back, unexpected water bill for two years, etc.', 'furniture, $0i kept bed; i’d had for years, and never triggered anything for me, oddly enough. kept till moved with boyfriend. also still have the chair that was room that night; it’s very comfortable chair. find empowering that could pick and choose what kept and what discarded from that time, one way regained control.', 'as was drafting this list, debated including hobby since much more than just cost consequence the assault. and many ways, the list ongoing. also reflects how incredibly fortunate was the aftermath: have supportive employer, find the most amazingly wonderful and supportive partner year and half later, have long-term physical health consequences.', also realized that didn’t know whether include things like more cab rides: even though the assault occurred home, i’m still more fearful the streets and more triggered street harassment result. should consider restaurant meals, massages, books, journals, movie tickets, tissues, tylenol pm, etc., life costs aftermath costs? life the aftermath, and all intertwined and messy.', 'jennifer works human rights, and lives with her fiancé and their bunny.']
'alexandra tara reade’s accusations sexual assault against joe biden appear very questionable once the story fully investigated.', 'update 4/2/20: were able contact longtime friend reade’s who wished remain anonymous, but they said they “do not believe her allegations,” claiming she has always been one seek attention. note: reached out ms. reade for comment but she refused.', 'update 4/25/20: have been contact with former boss reade’s who claims reade stole from her non-profit animal rescue while she was volunteer the organization. full details here.', 'every allegation sexual assault must taken seriously, and the #metoo movement has certainly given the victims sexual harassment and assault greater shield confidence coming forward with less fear being attacked themselves. with this said, however, the media’s responsibility thoroughly investigate accusations before jumping into story and allowing those allegations potentially destroy another human being, or, this case, political campaign. every woman deserves heard, but every media outlet still has the responsibility investigating and then relaying the public all the facts face value.', 'alexandra tara reade came forward last week with quite disturbing allegations against former vice president and current 2020 presidential candidate joe biden. april 2019, reade originally said that joe biden’s handsiness made her feel uncomfortable when she worked senate aide 1993. the time, however, she said that she did not consider biden’s actions sexualization, instead comparing her experience that being beautiful lamp.', 'this story suddenly changed last week when reade took part interview with podcast host katie halper. the interview, reade claimed that then-senator joe biden “penetrated” her, against her will, with his finger, encounter that took place ‘93.', 'while the allegations made reade are impossible prove disprove, examining reade’s actions over the years and other evidence that has been archived the internet, brings her honesty and integrity into question.', 'below will cover many the inconsistencies her story, the endless contradictions she has made over the years, and the evidence that paints picture someone who went from seemingly adoring joe biden and disliking vladimir putin 2017, someone who showed compassion and love for vladimir putin 2018, someone who accused biden doing horrific things her 2019 and 2020.', 'alexandra tara reade has gone many names and aliases over the years. according our research, she was born tara reade moulton, before changing her name her early 20s tara reade, then changing back tara moulton again, and then changing once again later life (through marriage) alexandra tara mccabe.', 'it appears though sometime between 2017 and early 2018 she began calling herself alexandra tara reade.', 'according website that she recently deleted, reade the founder gracie’s pet food pantry, graduated from seattle university school law, and was the co-host, creator and producer soul music radio show called “soul vibes” knry radio station that serves the santa cruz and monterey areas california.', 'at one point her life reade worked the domestic violence unit for the king county prosecutor, seattle, wa, ‘victim’s advocate,” and least one occasion testified expert witness domestic violence.', 'reade also worked for former congressman leon panetta, former senator joe biden, and former california state senator jack o’connell.', 'in 2017 alexandra tara reade praised joe biden for his action helping stop sexual assault, not just once, but multiple occasions.', 'between september 2016 and may 2017, alexander tara reade used twitter account, under the name tara mccabe, spread praise joe biden via tweeting, retweeting and liking various tweets.', 'there are multiple examples this, seen below:', 'in the below instance, reade retweeted tweet margaret cho that appears commend joe biden for working with lady gaga end sexual assault.', 'then again april 2017, reade liked tweet the huffington post that praised the former vice president for helping men realize how important they are the fight against sexual assault. the article commends biden for the steps has taken encourage men take responsibility stopping assaults against women.', 'also march 2017, reade made tweet claiming that joe biden “speaks truth,” and encouraged her followers “listen” him.', 'in november 2016, few weeks after the election, reade liked tweet made president obama, wishing joe biden “happy birthday,” and calling biden “the best vice president and friend” that could have had.', 'additionally, january 2017, reade likes two tweets the obama whitehouse archive, one quoting joe biden’s praise obama, and the other congratulating joe biden for receiving the presidential medal freedom.', 'this means that between the time she claims have been sexually assaulted biden, and the time that she publicly came forward with the allegations, she was spending time twitter commending her alleged perpetrator for helping end sexual assault among other things.', 'additionally, article reade wrote 2009, she commended joe biden for action had taken against domestic abuse, writing:', should know what abuser looks like. after all, was working for then senator joseph biden, who sponsored the violence against women act. but domestic violence equal opportunity offender.', 'in article reade wrote 2009, she claimed have left washington for the midwest because her husband tate, the time, had received job offer for congressman. she claims have also received job offer work for governor’s race california around the same time period.', 'soon received offer work governor’s race california and almost accepted. tate kept that night, pleading with with him while managed the congressman’s campaign. agreed and moved the frozen tundra the midwest. would not even last full winter.', 'however, the article “bring the light,” which reade wrote december 2018, and has since deleted, she stated that she left politics and washington because she was sick american imperialism and because she “love[d] russia with all her heart.”', 'then her article for the union april 2019, her story changed yet again, blaming her move joe biden essentially having her blacklisted.', 'then, went senate personnel for help. one helped me. resigned would say, was forced resign. was told look for another job. the aftermath, did not feel competent worthy anything. self-esteem plummeted and career nose-dived. what started with promise and possibility, ended because some prominent senator decided that liked legs. was sad and lost and moved on.', 'also article she wrote april 2019, reade claimed that she didn’t even know biden knows why she left working for him:', wish could say there was happy ending, that senator biden apologized that helped make amends, did not. not even know realized why left.', 'but then march 2020, reade says that biden fired her:', 'only one story can correct.', 'there are plenty other inconsistencies with her story, some which have been outlined above.', 'for example, reade’s april 17, 2019 article for the union, where she talks about her move washington work for joe biden, she claimed have driven across country get her destination.', was beyond excited, packed nissan and cats, told boyfriend goodbye and headed alone the cross country drive washington d.c.', 'in 2009, however, the story was different. this time she arrived airplane.', 'as the plane descended into washington c., siamese cat, cleo, meowed loudly from under seat. cleo had been through all many moves, men, and couple los angeles earthquakes. the lights washington d.c. reflected through the plane’s windows, the excitement new job senate staffer lay ahead me.', 'additionally january 2020, reade wrote that she was telling her story because picture the media has drawn conveying joe biden “champion women’s rights.”', 'the reason writing about the hypocrisy that biden supposed the champion women’s rights. also, watch how the media coddles him.', 'she calls the concept biden being champion women’s rights “hypocrisy,” but she too was boosting biden champion women’s rights 2017 when she retweeted multiple tweets doing just this.', 'using the same twitter account that she was praising joe biden with, 2017, reade also used her presence social media attack russia and condemn vladimir putin. below are all tweets that reade retweeted and/or liked 2017:', 'on march 2017, reade retweeted story the new yorker entitled “trump, putin, and the new cold war,” which essentially outlines how putin war against america and how trying “damage american confidence and undermine the western alliances diplomatic, financial, and military, that have shaped postwar world.”', 'in february 2017, reade retweeted tweet senator kamala harris, calling for investigation into russia’s involvement with the trump campaign.', 'in march 2017, reade retweeted mother jones article outlining all the troubling links between trump and russia, and how russia appears have tried subvert our democracy.', 'on march 2017 she liked tweet chelsea handler that attacked jeff sessions for lying about campaign meetings with russian officials.', 'in february 2017, reade liked tweet michael moore sharing story the new york times outlining russia’s attack our democracy, and how they infiltrated our political system.', 'in january 2017, reade retweeted attack chelsea handler russia for decriminalizing domestic violence. (more this later)', 'sure, there absolutely nothing unusual about showing disdain for russia and vladimir putin, unless course year later you start praise russia and putin.', 'that’s exactly what reade began do.', 'so where was tara reade right after she spent close year praising joe biden and attacking vladimir putin twitter, and right before she came forward with allegations against joe biden 2019?', 'reade was busy writing pro-putin and pro-russia tweets twitter, and articles for the medium, which when the media found, she quickly removed from the internet.', 'in article entitled “why liberal democrat supports vladimir putin,” reade seemingly believes that putin loving figure that women find “intoxicating.”', '”president putin has alluring combination strength with gentleness. his sensuous image projects his love for life, the embodiment grace while facing adversity. evident that loves his country, his people and his job.”', 'reade continues,', '“president putin’s obvious reverence for women, children and animals, and his ability with sports intoxicating american women”', 'for leader who once was criticized for making light rape, this certainly seems like odd statement.', '“i say, ‘well, very good women, holds them high regard.’', 'recall that just year prior, reade was retweeting damning critique chelsea handler russian legislation that putin signed off on, which essentially made women helpless instances domestic abuse.', 'on december 17, 2018, reade published another article entitled, “bring the light.”', 'in this article, reade wrote:', '“president putin scares the power elite america because compassionate, caring, visionary leader.”', 'let’s recall that little over year prior this article, reade was retweeting attacks putin for interfering our elections, while also sharing disdain for russian legislation that was demeaning women. now, however, reade appears attack america for trying “trap” putin with election meddling allegations.', '“president putin beloved russia and not going anywhere. instead being ensnared the recent political intrigues (and america trying hard set that trap). president putin keeping calm focus his own country’s development and future, without america. president putin, say keep your eyes the beautiful future and maybe, just maybe america will come see russia do, with eyes love. all russian friends, happy holiday and happy new year.”', 'in march 2019, reade also published another article, russian, that included celebratory quote from putin’s press secretary, rejoicing about the conclusions the mueller report. this article was also published english.', 'in this article, dated march 26–27, 2019, reade once again praises vladimir putin quite strange way, stating:', 'when the anti-russia, anti-putin propaganda starts up, personally, shut down. love russia, love russian relatives and friends. and like most women across the world, like president putin… lot, his shirt shirt off.', 'there seems recurring theme here. reade loves praise vladimir putin for his treatment women and for his appeal women, even though year prior she was retweeting and liking tweets condemning putin and russia.', 'it’s also worth noting that this article, written less than month before reade came forward with her original allegations against joe biden, mentions joe biden seemingly positive way.', 'whoever the democratic front-runner for the 2020 presidential run; beto o’rourke, the joe biden and stacey abrams ticket, kamala harris, bernie sanders. should urge these candidates elevate the national conversation more important matters.', 'it doesn’t end here though. tara reade also used her presence twitter defend vladimir putin, even going far seemingly defending him for murdering journalists and those who speak out against him.', 'then september 2019, months after her original accusations against biden, reade was still praising putin, and attacking americans for being “anti-russian”.', 'the problem is, she was one those americans attacking russia and putin 2017.', 'her praise putin continues, even into january 2020:', 'and february well, reade defends putin against those calling him “villain.”', 'this praise putin seemed only stop last week (late march 2020), right after she came forward with her new sexual assault allegations against biden, her tune suddenly changed:', 'in recent interview with vox news, tara reade claimed that she only praised vladimir putin 2018 and 2019 because she watched bunch noam chomsky” and was working novel set russia the time.', 'also april 2019, reade, explaining her praise for putin and russia, wrote:', creative writing group and writing novel, the poetry part the novel and the blogs because watch and read lot noam chomsky.', 'reade, who previously wrote about being victim domestic abuse 2009, told vox news that now she longer feels the same about putin she did 2018–2019 because she has since learned more about domestic violence russia.', 'but, evidence shows that reade was fact knowledgable russia’s stance domestic violence, year prior her writings. january 2017, reade retweeted and “liked” tweet chelsea handler condemning russia’s inhumane handling domestic violence.', 'additionally the article “bring the light,” which reade wrote december 2018, and has since deleted, she stated that she left politics washington because she was sick american imperialism and because she “love[d] russia with all her heart.” note: reade moved out washington and the west coast decades ago.', 'but wait, didn’t she tell vox news last week that she only praised putin and russia 2018–19 because she was “watching noam chomsky” the time? 2018, she claimed have always loved russia since she left washington over decade ago.', 'but that wouldn’t add either, considering she was attacking putin and russia twitter 2017.', 'so here the timeline. matter how you spin it, doesn’t add up.', 'there have been many accusations against tara reade, calling her “russian agent.” it’s not our job decide, and must admit that this accusation seems pretty far fetched. however, december 2019, reade did make quite interesting tweet:', 'the article reade appears referring can read here.', 'in 2017, tara reade could not praise joe biden enough for his politics, and his treatment women. then, suddenly 2019, her tune began change. not only did she begin accusing biden workplace misconduct and then eventually sexual assault, but she was also pushing russian/gop conspiracy theories about burisma.', 'here more complete timeline events, regarding tara reade’s actions toward both joe biden and vladimir putin.', 2019 pro-russia article, explaining her own experiences working the u.s. senate, appears have been written man, russian.', 'in now deleted article that alexandra tara reade published march 2019, just weeks before coming forward with her original allegations against joe biden, russian source ours caught something very unusual.', 'both the russian and english versions the articles were published the same date. however, the russian version was published first, and was written the the wrong gender. referring herself throughout the article, tara reade uses the masculine gender, the article was written male.', 'as you can see above, the masculine “л” used multiple occasions refer her own actions, she was male, not female.', 'for example, the following sentence', '“аааа, сказал, мой друг, это вопрос другому дню.”', 'can translated to:', 'ahhh, would say, friend, this question for another day.', 'but the word “say” (сказал) written the masculine form rather than the feminine form (сказала).', 'the entire article appears have been written this way. with this said, certainly possible that when she had the article translated someone messed the genders. but that definitely begs the question why should would want publish her articles both english and russian? one the first things you learn about when translating to, writing russian, are the gender roles. every russian language source we’ve spoken emphasized this.', 'so the only conclusion can draw that reade used translation service such google translate the article was written russian male and then translated english.', 'let’s examine little further:', 'so, not watching our country with naïve star spangled eyes any other nation.', 'in english the sentence doesn’t seem make much sense? any english writer would phrase more like:', '“so, not watching our country, any other country, with naive starry eyes (star spangled eyes).”', 'you can decide for yourself.', 'no, one will able say with certainty whether tara reade’s latest allegations are legitimate not, but the very least can ensure that the public has much information possible make informed decision. that’s the purpose this article.', 'with that, leave you with two things think about', '#1) tweet response made reade just weeks before coming forward with new allegations seemingly contradicting her original story, and just days before the daily beast reported the russian media becoming concerned with joe biden’s resurgence. you can see seems though reade admitting that she’s waiting for the perfect time release her new allegations order hurt joe biden’s campaign:', 'and #2) tweet response that reade made the parents accused rapist julian assange. she called the man hero”.', 'note: update 4/2/20: were able contact longtime friend reade’s who wished remain anonymous, but they said they “do not believe her allegations,” claiming she has always been one seek attention. went out our way get reade the record defend herself and also spoke individuals close her for years effort get someone tell that reade was telling the truth. those spoke could not and fact left even more convinced that things don’t add up.', 'update 4/25/20: have been contact with former boss reade’s who claims reade stole from her non-profit animal rescue while she was volunteer the organization. full details here.']
'how the institution that stands for justice failed and justice why secretary devos’s new campus sexual assault rules will gut #metoo', 'by kelly yang', 'recently, alma mater harvard law school wrote asking for donation for 15th reunion, class i’ll always share with the guy who sexually assaulted when was teenager and completely got away with it. it’s part life that wanted keep buried forever because filled with such shame, not just the fact that was sexually assaulted, but the fact that the faculty harvard law school actually voted whether take away degree for speaking about it.', 'the last thing expected would happen harvard law was sexual assault.', was only eighteen years old when happened, having skipped several grades, gone college 13, first generation immigrant, young woman color who had overcome poverty and beaten the impossible odds get in. the last thing expected would happen harvard law was sexual assault.', remember attacker telling after the assault, should probably church for what just did you.” this followed “and you should probably take shower.” did take shower. wanted take million showers. the showers did little assuage the fact that went the same school. his apartment was across the street from dorm. sat behind one classes.', saw him nearly every day, law school events and law firm interviews. whenever saw him, stomach would twist into knot tight, felt like was going hurl. the weeks that followed, went the university nurse, got the rape tests done, told the dean students what happened, switched dorms, and filed anonymous report the police.', 'whenever saw him, stomach would twist into knot tight, felt like was going hurl.', 'none this was enough when filed formal complaint against him. harvard law school the time adhered the “clear and convincing evidence” standard, higher standard for rape victims which secretary devos now allowing schools back to.', 'despite this incredibly high standard, third year law school, filed formal complaint harvard law school’s administrative board against attacker. graduation was fast approaching and couldn’t bear the thought immigrant parents having witness their daughter getting her diploma next the guy who sexually assaulted her. talked the new dean students well the dean harvard law school and brought charges sexual assault harvard’s administrative board.', 'the board harvard’s own mini-court system, the “jury” made faculty members and students. order proceed with the board, the law school required write and sign document saying would not bring criminal complaint with the police. signed it, thinking that the institution that stands for justice would find justice behalf.', 'harvard law school required write and sign document saying would not bring criminal complaint with the police.', 'the “trial” required sit room front attacker and listen for hours called liar traumatizing and soul-crushing cross examination process, which secretary devos now wants make mandatory campuses. still, presented evidence best could, including emails and health services records. the end, harvard law school still found attacker not guilty.', 'then, the other shoe dropped: the university was now investigating for “malicious prosecution.” the days that followed were the darkest ever waited for the faculty vote whether yank away own diploma. the law school told that could make the whole thing away just dropped the charges. traditional chinese parents urged consider backing down, worried this got out, would bring shame and family. but refused drop the charges. voice was armor.', 'then, the other shoe dropped: the university was now investigating for “malicious prosecution.” the faculty was voting whether not take away diploma.', 'the day was found “not guilty” was one the most heart-wrenching days life. was relieved; and gutted relief that the only justice got for being sexually assaulted was was allowed keep the degree earned. faculty member actually came afterwards and said, “congratulations! you get graduate! let give you bit advice. move on!”', did move on, sort of. moved away from law, having had entire legal education hijacked because this experience. started teaching and writing. stuffed what happened shoebox until 2014, when the department education found that harvard law school was “in violation title the education amendments 1972 for its response sexual harassment, including sexual assault.”', 'the dept education found multiple cases sexual assault where the school failed respond appropriately. tears streamed down face when read the words all this time thought was all alone. reading the report was like turning light dark cave; had idea there were others.', 'harvard law school issued statement response: “harvard recognized that could and should more.” they are the closest apology that i’d ever received from the institution that felt wronged me, institution admired since was little girl.', 'all this time thought was all alone. reading the report was like turning light dark cave; had idea there were others.', 'the department education findings coupled with witnessing the bravery all the women who stepped forward the harvey weinstein case empowered finally share what happened parachutes, debut young adult novel about two girls who experience sexual misconduct elite private school and the length the school goes cover up.', 'while can never get back those three years law school, hope that telling story, more schools will prioritize protecting the students, not the brand. hope what happened serves cautionary tale for the new rules campus sexual assault that secretary devos just finalized. implemented, they will make back system which opinion works against the victim. they will dilute the courage many women coming forward and speaking out myself included. they will make that much harder for victims sexual assault and sexual misconduct seek and find justice.']
nothing love more the fearless publication than justice for survivors being served cold plate justice.', 'and ron jeremy, porn icon the adult industry, about served heaping portion his.', 'on august 31, was announced that more charges sexual assault against additional women will laid jeremy, top the was already served june 2020, which could ultimately lead overall sentence 250 years prison for his heinous acts.', 'the #metoo and survivor community are pre-celebrating this massive win, because uncommon for attackers prosecuted, even less likely for celebrity attacker prosecuted, and top all off potential sentence 250 years? fantastic.', 'these additional charges follow his conviction assaulting women 2014. would have faced years prison convicted the first set charges june.', 'now, there’s another 140 years prison time potentially stacked top that.', 'we never see numbers like that\u200a— but we’re thrilled that this case the punishment somewhat matches the crime the deep and traumatic violation his victims.', 'it’s already massive victory for all, hopefully ensuring that this monster can longer violate another human being, and will rot jail for the rest his days.', "the victims' ages span from 15–54.", 'the 15-year-old survivor was passed out when jeremy assaulted her with objects and his own body. this charge dates back 2004.', 'the latest charge took place january 2020, where jeremy allegedly sexually assaulted 21-year-old woman outside hollywood business.', 'jeremy denies any sexual misconduct, but the evidence and victim testimonial count stacking against him.', 'there’s where else left for this monster run and hide.', 'he currently being held $6.6 million dollar bail.', 'the concept consent already seems little too grey for most society, making trials revolving around sexual assault especially tough\xa0to\xa0prosecute.', 'the whole idea consent being something that can given and then taken away, not being there all even\xa0if\xa0one\xa0is\xa0wearing\xa0revealing\xa0clothing, becomes very ‘tough’ philosophical debate for puny minds with misogynistic thinking.', 'when the end the day, consent very black and white\u200a— it’s either given enthusiastically isn’t.', 'and just because attacker thought was there, doesn’t mean actually was.', 'our fellow survivors the porn industry, who are among ron jeremy’s survivors, really have uphill battle this front\u200a— part their job performing sexual acting, which requires their consensual participation daily basis.', 'it would all too easy for our patriarchal society deem adult actresses “automatically having activated consent all times” because their choice profession.', 'just knew justice would not side because attacker was someone was dating romantically the\xa0time,\xa0the\xa0odds\xa0were\xa0against\xa0me\xa0when\xa0it\xa0came\xa0to\xa0being\xa0believed. knew the statistics. and so, didn’t step forward press charges.', 'i’m peace now with that decision\u200a— but, and understandably\xa0so, not everyone can find peace without justice. and that’s exactly what these survivors did. their bravery unparalleled and beyond comprehension\u200a— i’m proud these women for all they’ve done for the sexual assault survivor community already, just being brave enough step forward and speak up.', 'despite the unquestionable re-traumatization they’ll experience during the trial, they’re securing justice not only for themselves, but every survivor out there.', 'ron jeremy has likely had more sex than anyone you know. maybe, his career’s lifetime, he’s had more sex than every person you know added together.', 'and so, with access much sex, that also gets paid handsomely for, why the need forcibly assault others for sex when frequent access was accessible whenever wanted it?', 'the answer that that was never about sex\u200a— was always about power. that’s what sexual assault is\u200a— power move.', 'and it’s generally just abuse power, lot cases. porn icon, ron jeremy would have all the connections get new up-in-coming aspiring adult actress into the spotlight\u200a— exchange for bit payoff.', 'an “i’ll scratch your back you scratch mine” sort exchange.', 'sexual assault has always been power move, abuse power, and psychological game for building the egos pathetic, insecure attackers since its first use.', 'it’s never been about sexual gratification\u200a— it’s always been about psychological domination and breaking spirit\xa0of\xa0the\xa0victim.', 'that’s why this teeny tiny, poor excuse for human being went out his way rape women when could work and have consensual sex\u200a— because likes the domination, and the power, and the act reducing women nothing more than sex object get off\xa0on\xa0or\xa0inside\xa0of.', 'there’s good reason the united nations officially considers rape war crime\u200a— always has, and always will, come down power and domination over another person, meant shatter them completely.', 'this such big win for us, active community the global #metoo conversation.', pleased know that this bucket filth will likely spending the rest his days trapped behind bars, with all his life luxuries stripped away from him.', 'anyone who violates others such heinous and damaging way does not deserve the luxuries this world has offer.', 'he committed the crime\u200a— now should pay the ultimate price\xa0for\xa0his\xa0actions.', 'unable pay such hefty bail price over $6,000,000, it’s likely that jeremy will remain jail until his trial concludes.', 'to which many say, “great!”, because means can’t harass, attack traumatize any other victims while he’s custody.', 'the hope, always these cases, that the survivors the atrocities will get the justice they deserve, and that the vicious attacker will put and kept behind bars that cannot violate any other people\xa0ever\xa0again.', 'the amount entitlement this case absolutely astonishing… and that’s exactly why #metoo survivors are fighting tooth and nail bring justice those who have had stay silent for long.', 'we’re not silent anymore.', 'and our perpetrators should afraid… because we’re coming for all them.', 'never miss single beat sign for monthly newsletter get the scoop!👉 https://bit.ly/33xgtkt', 'medium.com', 'medium.com']
'like many people, i’ve been wrestling with the babe post that came out over the weekend. for those you who haven’t read it, it’s the story girl, “grace,” who went date with aziz ansari, the writer and star the netflix show master none, and was sexually assaulted.', 'but part the reason i’ve been wrestling with this article because like many, many, many others, having hard time convincing myself that this was, fact, sexual assault.', 'part this uncertainty comes from the fact that the conversation about what constitutes “sexual assault” reasonably nascent one. depending who you ask, sexual assault can encompass everything from the ickiness the bad date described the short story cat person the disturbing atrocities committed the likes harvey weinstein.', 'another part uncertainty comes from wondering how much sexual signaling lost translation. seems obvious that verbal “no” impossible misread, but the same time, live world where the media encourages women say “no” when they mean “yes” and “yes” when they mean “no.”', 'and, possibly the biggest part uncertainty comes from the fact that this counts sexual assault, then i’ve been sexually assaulted. multiple times.', 'from the dozens comment threads and articles i’ve seen around this topic, know what the answers questions are. least, what they’re supposed be.', understand these arguments, and sometimes even agree with these conclusions…', '…but sometimes don’t.', 'sometimes wonder about drunk sex, and wonder about how clunky and awkward would constantly assuring the person you’ve been married for twenty-five years that, yes, tonight, once again, you have permission take off shirt.', 'sometimes wonder about the times where i’ve given “playful no” when “no” didn’t really mean “no,” was just trying seem busy and sought-after.', wonder about the times where have been the pusher, not taking for answer.', wonder about the times where said “yes!” because wanted enthusiastic, and wonder about the times where was enthusiastic the moment, and then regretted days, months, years later.', wonder about own “cat person” stories. own aziz ansari stories. even they fit the definition, really, heart hearts, believe that those were sexual assaults? and believe that they were sexual assaults, whose fault that? mine? his? society’s?', 'does the term “sexual assault” lose its potency when applies many sexual encounters?', 'and worst all, wonder i’m wrong for wondering these things. wonder internalized misogyny has made rape apologist and victim blamer. wonder posting this going make people i’ve known for twenty years block social media, it’s going hurt career, feminist credibility, i’m triggering the victims the sexual assaults questioning the articles published about it… but aren’t supposed distrust everything read the internet anyway? who believe anything anymore???', 'the only conclusion have reached that there doesn’t need one conclusion.', glad that “grace” has sparked conversation about sexual experience that many people can relate to. easy condemn the harvey weinsteins the world, but this situation more immediate and challenging, and not just because affects many us. this situation warrants discussion because has nuance. more than simple abuse power, more than corrupt entertainment industry, and worth more the collective attention than granted dismissal the form moral judgment aziz himself.', 'this could have been about anybody.', 'this situation requires complete reevaluation what means have consensual sex. this requires conversations about the definition “sexual assault”, about the definition “consent”, about the definition “abuse power.”', 'but want emphasize that these are conversations. are allowed disagree about definitions, about what lines draw the sand, and are allowed reach different conclusions from reading the same article.', 'and, most importantly, are allowed no, should have impassioned debates after the fact.', 'the response opposing viewpoint from trusted, intelligent, good-hearted person should debate. impassioned, maybe. angry, perhaps. but debate nonetheless. discussion the only way dissect nuance, avoid blanket statements, and ultimately, learn.', still don’t know how feel about this aziz ansari story.', don’t know should still enjoy master none, should even watch reruns parks and recreation.', don’t know what would today were “grace.” barely even know how define the times life when i’ve been her.', don’t know the best way re-socialize women that they feel comfortable saying “no” and don’t know the best way re-socialize men respect women when they say it.', 'but know that these are conversations want keep having. want have them facebook and want have them over the thanksgiving dinner table. want have them the comments section new york times article, and want have them messenger thread with best friends from twenty years ago. want have this conversation over and over and over again that know for sure where stand.', 'having this conversation with people who agree with feels good and validates feelings, and world where almost elected roy moore the senate, it’s nice reminded that i’m not alone beliefs.', 'but most importantly, want have this conversation with people who disagree with me. may not feel good, may not validating, easy, fun discussing with people side, but the best way for wrestle with these hard problems. it’s the best way for stop wondering and start knowing, and it’s the best way certain that opinions are own.']
holloway', 'the hollywood mogul’s ostensible mea culpa perfectly written example things not when you are apologizing.', 'for decades, harvey weinstein has served the real-life inspiration for every tyrannical, foul-mouthed, hot-headed fictional movie studio executive. for pretty much just long, according bombshell report from the new york times, weinstein has been serial sexually harassing aspiring young actresses who come into his orbit.', 'the times offers lengthy list women, some them now famous, who were allegedly subjected weinstein’s lewd overtures, including ashley judd, who says weinstein requested she watch him shower and rose mcgowan, whom weinstein gave settlement 1997 following “an episode hotel room during the sundance film festival.”', 'there were least eight more hush money pay outs, per the times, recipients including young assistant new york 1990, actress 1997, assistant london 1998, italian model 2015 and [former weinstein company employee lauren] o’connor shortly after.” with traceable track record like that, it’s almost impossible believe that there aren’t other women who chose keep quiet rather than take one the most powerful men hollywood.', 'in response the times report, weinstein released statement that ostensible mea culpa but reads more like perfectly written example things not when you are apologizing. let’s run through some the highlights, shall we?', '“i came age the ’60s and ’70s, when all the rules about behavior and workplaces were different. that was the culture then.”', came age time when the workplace was where men went compare dick size with other men, and then we’d have our secretaries “skirts,” called them judge who won. was that bad? confused all these new rules.', 'theestablishment.co', '“i have since learned it’s not excuse, the office out it. anyone.”', 'i’ve learned it’s not excuse, and yet still offered excuse, because i’ll level with you here: i’ve learned nothing.', '“i realized some time ago that needed better person, and interactions with the people work with have changed. appreciate the way i’ve behaved with colleagues the past has caused lot pain, and sincerely apologize for it. though i’m trying better, know have long way go. that commitment. journey now will learn about myself and conquer demons.”', 'well, this seems like progress, right?', 'just wait.', '“over the last year, i’ve asked [celebrity lawyer] lisa bloom tutor me, and she’s put together team people. i’ve brought therapists, and plan take leave absence from company and deal with this issue head on.”', 'lisa bloom told the times that weinstein “an old dinosaur learning new ways” and that she “explained him that due the power difference between major studio head like him and most others the industry, whatever his motives, some his words and behaviors can perceived inappropriate, even intimidating.”', 'what’s weird about this that i’m pretty sure weinstein already understands the power differential play between him and “most others the industry,” particularly hopeful actors. one woman who temped for weinstein said told her that “if she accepted his sexual advances, would boost her career.” o’connor said that weinstein’s targets were almost invariably “vulnerable women who hope will get them work.” weinstein six-time oscar winner and titan the film industry understood with crystal clarity his own status vs. those allegedly dangled careers front for varying sexual favors. alleged sexual harassers and abusers such bill o’reilly, bill cosby and roger ailes, among many others, use their power against those who have none. that’s how this whole awful thing works.', 'i’m pretty sure weinstein already understands the power differential play between him and ‘most others the industry.’', 'also, for the record, the fact that weinstein reportedly used his fortune pay off women and keep all those charges quiet suggests he’s well aware that his behaviors are “inappropriate, even intimidating.”', '“i respect all women, and regret what happened.”', 'god. that “so” really not helping here. someone should’ve read this thing out loud before they sent out.', '“jay wrote 4:44 ‘i’m not the man thought was, and better that man for children.’ the same true for me.”', 'honestly, harvey weinstein borrowing jay-z lyric about his marital infidelity beyoncé describe his contrition about harassing who knows how many women over the last years just too much get into right now. (who that arbitrary insertion even for? the “kidz”? maybe his next sorry-not-sorry letter he’ll quote lil yachty something.) worth noting that the line isn’t actual jay-z quote, just give you sense the real time and heartfelt labor that went into this thing.', '“i want second chance the community, but know i’ve got work earn it.”', 'what community? you mean hollywood? mel gibson the up-and-up these days and the golden globes gave woody allen lifetime achievement award just three years ago. fox news fired bill o’reilly six months ago and then welcomed him back last month like esteemed honoree medal ceremony. i’m sure you already know, “the community’” just awaiting sign from the echo chamber when it’s okay cool with you again.', 'theestablishment.co', '“i have goals that are now priorities. trust me, this isn’t overnight process. i’ve been trying this for years, and this wake-up call.”', 'wait, according harvey weinstein, he’s been trying “do this” meaning “be better” presume for “10 years”? would genuinely love hear what kind all-powerful pervy forces have been forcing harvey weinstein the man whom percent hollywood legit afraid piss off keep sexually harassing women for the last decade.', 'here’s where really gets good which mean off the g.d. rails.', '“i going need place channel that anger, i’ve decided that i’m going give the nra full attention. hope wayne lapierre will enjoy his retirement party. i’m going the same place had bar mitzvah. i’m making movie about our president, perhaps can make joint retirement party.”', 'on the heels the latest mass shooting, many welcome any takedown the nra. and considering his historic unpopularity, it’s always nice hear mention trump longer having access the nuclear codes. but the whole tone this section verges the bizarre, that until you remember you are the midst pissing match, midstream. “i’m going throw you party the same place where became man, which you should consider direct threat your own manhood through some convoluted illogical thought stream won’t explain.” something.', 'you are the midst pissing match.', 'anyway, there are three people who seem perfect for some sort man-off, it’s weinstein, trump and the head the nra. there’s that.', '“one year ago, began organizing million foundation give scholarships women directors usc. while this might seem coincidental, has been the works for year. will named after mom, and won’t disappoint her.”', guess that’s good thing. let’s just sure every scholarship includes clause that states, “you are way now, nor the future, beholden harvey weinstein.” just safe.']
day eric garner was killed july 17, 2014, the day michael brown jr. was killed august 2014, the day tamir rice was killed november 22, 2014, the day walter scott was killed april 2015, the day freddie gray was killed april 19, 2015.', 'no one job said anything. through all those senseless and horrific deaths black men and children the hands white police officers, not one person job said anything about it. not one person job was black either.', few years have passed since i’ve been that company, but have never forgotten that feeling; the feeling being utterly distraught, yet completely alone sadness.', 'last night, couldn’t sleep. stayed writing piece about the first time white person work actually acknowledged our long-standing american tragedy racism, bigotry, and injustice. that first time was this week.', black woman.', 'not only that, black woman working tech, one the most homogeneous industries ever birthed.', 'as woman tech, account for 30% the tech workforce.', 'as black person tech, account for the tech workforce.', currently work venture capital firm that invests tech startups. our firm arguably the most diverse the country with blacks, latinx, whites, and women. just put that perspective, venture capital firms are 97% white and asian and 89% men, yeah, we’re really really diverse comparison.', 'when went into work yesterday, the first thing boss, who white woman, mentioned was the anger and pain she was feeling about the fatal shootings two more black men white police officers.', 'she talked about the articles she read and the videos she watched and how she wanted say something about the crowd silicon valley founders and investors we’d gathering for event later that evening. she took the time ask how was doing and wanted talk take some time off. she was all ways very supportive and proactively so.', don’t think realized the time. wasn’t until actually sat down write this piece, fact, that the significance that short interaction really sunk for me.', white person.', 'better yet, boss.', 'at work.', 'initiated conversation with about racial injustice america.', 'she expressed disgust and outrage.', 'she asked was ok.', 'she offered speak out.', 'she planned take action.', 'how many black brothers and sisters especially tech can say that their white colleagues acknowledge the current state racial injustice america?', 'seriously, want know. fact, leave comment this post, can all know. haven’t been tech that long five years now but i’ll tell you one thing for sure:', 'and why? well because…', 'and because tech does not interact with black people work home…', 'so yesterday, when boss white woman tech empathized with me, black woman, that was a.very.big.deal. fact, was the first time white colleague (and i’ve had many) has ever said anything about the killing black person america white police officer and there’s unfortunately been several opportunities for them speak up.', 'the fact that white colleague work setting made point make point about racial injustice america and acknowledge the black community’s pain, hurt, and anger over it…the fact that she didn’t just act like today was “business usual” that meant more than any free lunches, office perks, holiday bonuses ever could.', 'that means something.', 'so i’m going say this all white brothers and sisters working alongside black brothers and sisters:', 'here’s how…', 'don’t wait for a/the black person your company say something. don’t wait for your erg rep send you email. take upon yourself get educated about the do’s and don’ts being good ally.', 'you don’t have have all the right words all the perfect answers, but just saying something the black and white people you work with acknowledging that this atrocity happened and that you’re hurt that really start making difference. speak about the humanity those innocent black men, speak about the mourning the black community and our entire country. just whatever you do, speak from the heart.', 'what’s happening black people under police patrol national tragedy, and having traumatizing effect many people. don’t expect your black colleagues able jump right back into work nothing’s happened— especially they’re workplace that doesn’t even acknowledge these horrific events are taking place.', 'tech smart like really freakin’ smart. tech wouldn’t taking over the world wasn’t damn smart. don’t buy the don’t know what do” spiel. you have growth mindset when comes everything else. why your critical thinking skills suddenly vanish when comes figuring out how you can contribute this whole racial equality thing? whether investing more diverse workforce, lobbying for judicial system reform, refusing business with cities and individuals that perpetrate racism…there are countless things you can take action on. wholeheartedly believe that you put your minds, hearts, and resource$ together, you can devise solutions collaboration with the grassroots movements already the ground and help write new, more promising chapter race relations america.', 'each has part play creating the workplace and world that sees the humanity and value all people. each has part play creating environment where all people can *live* with dignity and respect. accomplish this, it’s vital that you some retrospection and reflection and ask yourself: what doing today part the solution? what will tomorrow part the solution? what will next week? next month? next year?…', 'we must never stop looking the mirror, for it’s the only way can truly ensure bring about the change wish see.', 'continue read follow-up this post: dear america: meet white boss that talks about race and also check out article i’m not surprised black people are being killed america', 'also, want sincerely thank you for engaging with story.']
this story', '--:--', '--:--', 'if this the age victimhood, then there are larger (and more recognised) victim groups than gender and racial minorities.', 'my race (and certain other traits) put firmly the “victim minority” bracket—well, you ignore the horribleness maleness. should clarify that don’t see myself those terms. but strong the wave desire identify and deify victims, that *some* people everyday life insist interacting with member victim class. they mean well.', 'i’ve resorted spending more time than i’d like thinking about these terms—if only can find ways ridding myself them. and have found couple.', 'but all the illogicalities that have emerged from the degeneration political (and politicised) discourse, the biggest one (to me) the exaltation subjectivity.', 'this the idea that individual’s feelings matters with universal consequences, are more important than the construction universally comprehensible and verifiable standards.', 'this the biggest illogicality because imposes the expectation that everyone, everywhere should get along and hold hands… while assaulting, sadomasochistic fashion, the only mechanism which can allow them so—objectivity.', 'this not just conceptual problem and i’ll illustrate that with practical example.', 'everywhere look, see stats about how there are either too many black people too few whatever state existence we’ve decided topical. there are stats about how few women there are stem and cherry-picked list desirable professions. there’s the inexplicably persistent gender pay gap narrative, which has been repeatedly debunked such sexist publications harvard female professor harvard, specific) and forbes (in article written another female academic).', 'and thomas sowell black economist) has been admonishing the western world since the 80s, about the inaccuracies (and dangerousness) the way dishonestly politicise disparities income and opportunity, across race and gender. (you can watch the full 20-minute interview with thomas sowell here)', 'but digress… because don’t have problem with these statistics, nor even here (solely) debate their validity.', 'it’s what we—humans—do with these statistics that really bothers me. abuse them with this new-found exaltation subjectivity.', 'we turn victimhood into mechanism for attaining disproportionately large power, then what humans best when wield too much power—abuse it.', 'so, say, “my subjective reality that white people are racist and evil, therefore the fact there aren’t more black ceos *must be* the fault white people.”', 'or say, “my subjective reality that all men are all evil, rapey gorillas, the fact that there aren’t more women stem *must be* the fault men.”', 'even ignoring that all these conversations, never have seen causal chain constructed (let alone causal link established)… there’s still huge inconsistency how these ideas evolve.', 'to prove that [insert minority group] would achieve perfectly even 50/50 split opportunities, were not for the interference [insert majority oppressor], pretend there’s perfect uniformity across groups.', 'we proclaim that gender and race are social constructs, completely removed from science and reality.', 'women, men and people different races are perfectly uniform all abilities, interests and aptitudes. this incredibly subjective stance take… but let’s entertain for minute.', 'if this were true, then there’d absolutely need for diversity. are all uniform, then are all interchangeable.', 'this exemplary case mutual exclusivity. either are all different, therefore need good mix capitalise unique qualities… we’re all the same, and each human possesses the same abilities the same degree competence every other human.', 'if acknowledge diversity, *must* also acknowledge lack uniformity. and acknowledge lack uniformity, *must* also acknowledge inequalities ability.', 'the mistake make that our prejudices cause value some abilities more than others—and are simplistic enough assume that being less skilled these abilities makes people less valuable too.', 'for example, one would bat eyelid were suggest that the average height dutch people greater than the average height senegalese people. but swap height for beauty, some other politically charged subject and the reaction completely changes—because human prejudices cause assume “beauty” and “iq” are more valuable (or humanising) qualities than height.', 'this prejudice manifests itself other unhealthy ways which will cover later.', 'but like ask myself, “what i’m wrong?” so, did and could find only one potentially credible criticism.', 'that criticism that diversity isn’t about biological composition and abilities. it’s about cultures and communal experiences, and how those shape individuals.', 'this idea like… but this the case, shouldn’t encouraging people fixate less the artificial constructs gender and race—aka the “patriarchy” and the “white devil”? both follow arbitrarily biological lines categorisation and represent hypocritical stance those who claim things like race and gender shouldn’t used judge others. surely, the shared experience the human condition supersedes both? surely, the lesson that all humans (male female, white non-white, heterosexual homosexual etc.) tend abuse power when they wield too much it?', 'if race and gender are social constructs, are the problems see the world not more likely borne human nature—rather than “white nature” “male nature” any other selectively defined nature?', 'and the solutions these problems not lie our ability find connections, based shared human experiences and struggles, which traverse cultures and communities?', 'yet, was james damore’s position that women, group (not individual level) tend have different interests from men, which got him fired. didn’t say the interests held women are inferior those held men—simply that they are different.', 'it’s funny because firing james damore seemed highly “patriarchal” move. proved that google believes the interests that are most likely held men are more valuable than the interests that are more likely held women. therefore, the only way argue that women (as group) are valuable men argue that women are the same men.', 'this sad conclusion because encourages women value themselves based how identical they are men.', 'this symptomatic general move society. push groups identified being marginalised measure their value based how identical they are groups which are considered unfairly free marginalisation.', 'equality has been (wrongly) conflated with uniformity.', 'similarly, apple’s diversity officer lost her job because she dared suggest that group white men can still diverse. whiteness overpowering now, that completely nullifies every other aspect person’s existence? their nationality? their sexuality? their socio-economic background? their religious background? their philosophical background?', 'in age when bemoan the paucity women top jobs tech companies, should the expression logical opinion measured manner sackable offence? especially for one the few talented women (out countless others) who’s bucked the trend female underrepresentation?', 'subjectivity has been given such supremacy that the popular positions gender and race are riddled with inconsistencies that they suggest:', 'but why does this all matter—why play this game semantics?', 'because there are real problems the world, which need real solutions. i’m going shun political correctness and talk about those problems.', 'incarceration rates among black people western societies are high. women are underrepresented high-paying jobs (though this not the same gender pay gap)—and mustn’t forget that men are overrepresented jobs where people are most likely die. rape too high—i won’t quote stats because don’t care there’s one rape year, that’s still too many. mental health problems take many lives every year—especially men’s. young, working class, white men represent (arguably) the most economically under-privileged group the uk.', 'and these are just few the problems face.', 'any good scientist (or problem solver) will tell you that change outcome, you must first accurately diagnose its cause. you try affect the wrong cause, you will not reverse the negative outcome.', 'this why i’m opposed the politicisation these issues. when politicise them, people stop looking for answers and start looking for scapegoats. throw the exaltation subjectivity into the mix and you get recipe for obscurantism and ego tripping.', 'meanwhile, people are still suffering the very real consequences these problems.', 'this not game where the blacks win and the whites lose, the women win and the men lose. it’s reality where all win lose together—because there’s only one earth and *all* have share it.', 'it may well turn out, upon thorough investigation, that men and white people are blame for 90% the world’s problems… but currently have proof, just feelings. so, thorough investigation must come nonetheless.', 'even english criminal law, the condemnation one person requires the accumulation near-insurmountable evidence. you generally need actus reus (proof that criminal act was committed) and mens rea (proof that the accused wilfully committed said criminal act). that means slip and accidentally knock person dead, can’t guilty murder (there’s mens rea).', 'yet, casually condemn entire groups people?', 'and, clear, have political social affiliations. this article does not exist support one cause the expense the other. think the left wing just full shit the right wing. judge people individual-to-individual basis. don’t care you’re white, black, straight, genderqueer, conservative, liberal, nationalistic anarchistic—if you show kindness and openness, will the same.', 'but find funny that our desire for labels strong, we’ve labelled those who disagree with the adoption labels they call “centrists”, slight… people who are too spineless “pick side”, guess. we’re somehow in-between this stupid, unworkable idea and that other stupid, unworkable idea.', 'i’m not centrist. i’m saying i’m not even the same spectrum. the damn thing broken.', 'i’m saying when you let the need right and focus what the world needs get right, you might see that the answer one has good enough answer yet—and all need keep looking. hard.', '*11 january 2018 update*', 'i’ve gotten loads responses and private messages this article. 99% them supportive—unsurprisingly, the overwhelming majority from women and ethnic minorities.', 'but there’s small sect people—many whom admit not even reading the article—who’ve sent abuse because “this could only have come from privileged white, male pig”. lol.', 'ironically, most these people have been white men (i’m sorry, but they just have been… don’t know why).', 'they assume there’s way could this rational and detached, had felt the punishing hand discrimination life. they presume know what all black people think and why they think it. you need any more reasons why don’t want people deciding for what not (and how should shouldn’t think), based race gender, well here’s another.', 'but don’t want make this about me. especially since two readers have left comments which express, educated and eloquent fashion, why it’s logical think the way do… particularly because i’ve lived through discrimination.', 'since race and gender apparently affect the validity people thoughts… and i’m apparently not real black person, i’m trying something new. here’s black man and woman explaining why they too don’t want gender race ever come into the equation—whether for positive negative discrimination.', 'verified, authentic feminist woman', 'medium.com', 'verified, authentic african black man', 'medium.com', 'fake black man, signing out.']
i’m tapping out. i’m bowing out the startup rat race. no, we’re not shutting down baremetrics. very much the opposite. i’m just finished subscribing and following the traditional startup mentality build our company.', 'in june 2016, realized had less than two months runway left. had existential crisis our hands, the kind that you’ve read about hundreds times. the kind where the business was there one day, then all the sudden just…wasn’t. were just burning money way too fast.', 'we had course-correct very quickly. the whole team took 15% pay cut and took 30% pay cut. long story short story that i’ll write about more depth the next month so), got back course. everyone now back full salaries and we’re profitable top that. we’ll million-dollar company this summer. but getting here has been quite the struggle.', 'the way that ended that situation was just such classic “silicon valley” scenario that i’m honestly embarrassed even talk about it. raising multiple rounds funding (we had rounds totaling $800k, which honestly small most standards), hiring fast, spending faster, pushing hard for the mythical “hockey stick” growth. beating ourselves when didn’t have that growth. were embracing all.', 'it wasn’t like our investors were breathing down our necks demanding this, they categorically were not. was self-prescribed. was choosing it. was willingly playing the part. “hey! we’ve got bank account full money! should spend it! right? right?!?!?”', wasn’t trying negligent with the money. was just overly optimistic about revenue growth. our revenue was definitely growing month over month, but eternal optimism believed that it’d magically start really growing “just few months”.', 'instead, our revenue growth has been annoyingly steady. there’s hockey stick. just good ‘ole fashioned “normal” growth.', 'this past november took much needed break, completely disconnecting from work for days. gave chance pull head out the startup hole and get some clarity things.', realized that for the past couple years we’d been this weird quasi faux-startup “gahhhh need growth!” mode. say “faux” because actually have revenue, which the majority the typical startups don’t, but needed desperately get profitable that were just throwing out things left and right hoping something would stick and the magic pill.', 'we were launching things and immediately heading the next big idea the list because our time was running out.', 'and yes, understand, this borderline comical anyone the bootstrapped world really anyone outside “startups”. but like said, had found ourselves fully embracing “silicon valley startup” mentality.', 'that day break gave actual perspective. we’d been trying build baremetrics like there was this imaginary startup finish line. though could lose even come first. were treating our company like were some race for time. but there race. there isn’t another runner could lose and can’t “come first”.', 'everything you read about building startup implies there’s formula. that doing and gives you the highest probability outcome. but that formula assumes outcome” the thing everyone should shooting for.', 'jason lemkin, who really does have some amazing advice around building saas companies (especially the topic sales), wrote this couple years back:', 'can you really, honestly, commit obsessively thinking, worrying, futzing, stressing about how the impossible. every. single. moment the day.', 'nothing else, but work. even when you are playing with the kids. having dinner with your husband. because that’s what it’s going take.', 'what the actual hell. not only that not necessary, it’s incredibly unhealthy and completely unproductive. not obsessively think about your startup “every single moment the day”.', 'doing that what kills startups every day. founders get burnt out. ceos make terrible decisions inside vacuum. all because they lose perspective working inside their bubble.', get why people read stuff like that (or any advice from people who’ve had some big payout). try find patterns and formulas everything make sense it. think “well they did those things, then can those things too and also succeed!”', 'but that’s not how life works and that’s not how business works.', 'so many entrepreneurs think that the end goal big acquisition going public. they model their actions based the handful atypical and statistically improbable stories they read about. they read advice like the stuff above talking about sacrificing every facet their life for their business, and they think that’s some way live.', 'but it’s not. it’s not way live. it’s not healthy. doesn’t make you interesting. it’s not fun building anything that way. it, statistically speaking, likely won’t even make you very much money.', 'so what you changed what “success” is? what success was paying yourself $150,000 year and building real sustainable business that you build for years and sell for few million? (no, that’s not considered success silicon valley.) maybe you never sell it?', 'what “success” was paying yourself $30,000 year and traveling the world with your family?', 'what “success” building amazing place work where your team paid really well and actually enjoys working there (instead having people who jump from startup startup playing the equity game)?', 'what “success” wasn’t attached team size but instead was attached customer happiness?', 'there are endless number ways define “success” and it’s the definition insanity think there’s only one way it. redefining success something different than the way silicon valley defines doesn’t mean you aren’t ambitious. i’d argue following formula the thing that isn’t ambitious.', 'no, creating your own definition success and doing things the way you want them…that’s success me. that’s the ambitious thing. because doing things your own way, your own terms, where you’ll find fulfillment. and really, that’s what we’re all after.']
ound all the people you know. what are they all doing?', 'when asked myself this question, realized people network were all doing roughly the same few things:', 'these four things are what call the rat race. the rat race, me, trying find happiness and fulfillment being like everybody else and following set formula.', 'life the rat race like trying copy someone else’s masterpiece hoping feel like you did all yourself and learned something along the way.', 'so, made decision quit the rat race. this meant being different and treading own path.', 'there was pre-defined plan. basically, there were three rules:', 'pretty simple rules you ask and cliche best but effective when implemented.', 'the rat race leans towards comfort. the opposite idea confront your fears. case, was busting one fear that kickstarted the process. biggest fear was flying airplane.', 'growing during september 911 had more profound effect than realized. family also feared flying too which didn’t help either.', 'the decision things that scared meant that the first one the list was fly. took 60-minute flight from melbourne sydney. the flight reminded what felt like get blood test for the first time.', 'before the flight, there were nerves, during the flight felt like having needle arm, and well after the flight, felt like could anything. small steps. one fear time.', fundamental problem with being part the rat race that you become like everybody else thus not being yourself. when you have wake each day and act out everybody else’s life, feels like crap.', 'it takes much time and energy someone else when would ten times easier just yourself.', 'in your own skin, living your own way, you can feel what it’s like have pride yourself.', 'escaping the rat race, for me, was about being unapologetically myself and sharing story both the good bits and the bad bits. there were consequences making that decision, but later found out that the upside was even better.', 'you connect people completely different level when you are yourself and are not afraid talk about what you’ve done wrong just much what you’ve done well.', 'only talking about your successes surface level. going deeper means you have also talk about your mistakes, screw-ups, tough times, failures and misjudged decisions.', 'right the start, said that chasing money put you square the middle the rat race. saving money the opposite.', 'when you save money, you buy yourself time and that means you don’t have live your life the hamster wheel endless pursuit for money and material objects that can’t join you your grave when you die.', 'saving money discipline where you’re always saving for rainy day that some point, you’ll have some money put aside. when you have savings, you get more freedom, you buy yourself time and you don’t need reactive.', 'if you lose your primary source income tomorrow, you have time.if your car breaks down, you can fix it.if you need spend money upgrading your skills, you can.', 'all this made possible with savings. the line out rich dad poor dad says, and sums this idea fantastically, pay yourself first. every time you get money, put some away where you can’t touch it.', 'the second part saving money multiplying it. this allows you further escape the rat race over-consuming, and get paid while you sleep.', 'sounds good, doesn’t it? well taking your savings and investing things that pay you passive income good idea.', 'it’s worth reading few books investing before you start otherwise you could end joining the rat race again losing all your money. “money master the game” good book start with.', 'once you can communicate well, you can anything. much life not about how smart you are but how good you are conveying message and influencing people take action.', 'closely tied fear flying was public speaking. learning the art speaking properly without um’s and ah’s took lot practice. cost $150 year join toastmasters and it’s one the best investments i’ve made.', 'when you’re not following everybody else, you’ll find yourself having opinions, ideas and wanting share stories that challenge people’s view the world. this the opposite the rat race.', 'you’ll learn question everything you know and everything that everybody else knows who ‘following the plan.’ knowing how communicate helps.', 'even you’ve given the idea the rat race, you’re still going consumed negative thoughts, down days, people dying around you and tiredness burnout. this the human condition.', 'what writing does allow you metaphorically dump all this toxicity into words your computer. once you write down, the problem doesn’t hold the same power anymore. putting into words helps you see the problem for what most the time it’s seeing how ridiculous the problem reality.', 'writing something small every day and then taking step two and publishing somewhere, next level opinion. it’s freeing for your mind and also has the potential help someone else who may trapped their own head.', 'life will look oddly similar the more you read. your human experience will not seem that odd when you read two autobiography books month.', 'reading sparks ideas and takes the mind off the hamster wheel.', 'curiosity and creativity are sparked with regular reading. have reading partly thank for understanding what the rat race is, and then finding the strategies escape it.', 'any normal person can point out what’s wrong with the world. anyone can critic. anyone can tell you what’s wrong.', 'the biggest idea that will help you escape the rat race find what’s right with the world; it’s finding the good every situation; it’s not jumping conclusions; it’s learning develop compassion for those that the wrong thing.', 'it’s being the man/woman that can find something good situation when everyone else the room has nothing nice say being consumed negativity.', 'the rat race being armchair critic. the rat race letting your brain that millions years old run its default survival mode that can only see what wrong and when there danger.', 'see the good the world.', 'escape the rat race. life actually pretty good.', 'join email list stay touch.']
speech that wrote for local event. thought i’d post medium because might help explain some context white people.', 'always fun for us. during the first meeting, introduced myself saying that talks about race are emotional.', '“i speak with lot emotion,” said, “and sometimes that emotion anger. that should allowed, because anger valid response oppression. i’m not angry you individual, but system injustice.”', 'sometime later, man said that hoped could “rise above emotions.” wanted “intellectual discussion” using logic could “really get heart the matter” without getting “derailed emotions.”', 'now there heck lot subtext there, and really want you understand it. but need lay bit foundation. we’re going step back time bit can explain how guy beating his cousin thousand years ago still affects how act differently the dining room.', 'one day, jumped boat with few hundred his buddies and crossed the english channel pick fight. that was when norman france conquered anglo-saxon england.', 'now when you conquer people, you gotta make damn sure they know you’re charge. one the best ways that make them speak your language. french became the official language england. royalty spoke it, lawmakers spoke it. english was even outlawed some areas. the french said their language was refined, proper, and that anglo-saxon was crude, vulgar language the unwashed rabble.', 'total scam, course. anglo-saxon english was just refined, beautiful, and was hella poetic. but billy and his boys had convince “those people” that the french were “better.” after awhile, the people started believing him.', 'here’s the crazy thing: still do.', damn lot our words english come from this period, and pretty much all them seem… more refined, proper. this why “dine” fine restaurant but “eat” barbecue. this why “drink” beer, but might “imbibe” 30-year-old bottle châteauneuf-du-pape.', 'you need this sink in: dude makes bunch crap about his cousin’s language justify three generations oppression, and thousand years later still believe him.', 'culture how pass information about our world across generations. it’s why our children speak our language, it’s how they learn from us. culture why some humans eat with fork, and some eat with chopsticks. culture explains why someone standing really close while they talk you might feel threatening european, but comforting west african. culture defines what acceptable volumes are when speaking, and how women are expected act social situations.', 'culture defines all our social expectations, but also our social prejudices. every single thing and say, and say the context our culture.', 'now, making culture normative that is, defines what “normal” quite useful. the french used well england. another time was used was when west africans were brought this country chattel slaves.', 'the society here america needed way justify the enslavement people for other reason than they looked bit different. like the normans, they used culture it. slaves were made speak english but were forbidden read and write. fact, the myth was promoted that they were slow and couldn’t even taught.', 'white people saw slaves animals, apes best, “lesser humans.” they expected slaves work like animals too long, hard, and without complaint. naturally, slaves rebelled, slowing work feigning sickness. blacks were seen everyone inherently lazy, and lazy blacks were beaten killed.', 'white people expected slaves subservient particularly useful tactic since less than quarter whites actually owned slaves. slaves had whatever any white person told them do. this made all whites “better” than slaves, and supportive the system.', 'and there were the sexual controls. white men objectified and raped black women will, while promoting the myth that white women’s purity was threatened merely the gaze black man. this was particularly useful means control both black men and white women.', 'all these prejudices still reside white culture.', 'antonin scalia said that blacks “should slower schools.” this supreme court justice, folks.', 'donald trump said believed that “laziness trait blacks.” this man running for president!', vegan activist twitter account posted picture comparing slaughtered pigs lynched black people. leslie jones rocked the ghostbusters reboot and was immediately compared ape racist trolls. meanwhile lena dunham weaponized her white body against innocent black man because she felt insecure.', 'and apparently countless black men would not have gotten shot the back they had “just done what they were told do.”', 'like thoughtlessly “dining” instead “eating,” white people often carry prejudices about slavery without realizing it. that why the white refrain “slavery was long time ago, get over it” falls deaf black ears. it’s not black people holding slavery, it’s white people, carrying the prejudices their culture.', 'it’s difficult problem address. paraphrase george orwell, white people have prejudices about people color because american culture has normalized whiteness, but the fact that people color act “differently” further entrenches the “obvious correctness” white cultural norm.', 'why normal eat with fork instead chopsticks?', 'why normal for man wear suit business meeting instead loose, colorfully printed robe?', 'why normal sit chair instead the floor?', 'why woman long gown and bonnet accepted archaic, perhaps, but accepted? why nun wearing black gown and habit accepted? why woman burka and hijab somehow threatening?', 'why teach the way do? write our laws the way do? short, why our society the way is?', 'all these questions have the same answer: because live western european society that was built western europeans for western europeans live in. this culture normative that most white people never have think about even know exists, because everything they naturally fits the norm.', 'being normal makes everything else “abnormal”', 'damn near everything that black people already outside the white norm. black people talk too loud, they don’t what they’re told, they “act out,” they stand too close, they have weird hair, they dress funny, they shake their butts too much (which fine taylor swift does it).', 'when white person says “it’s not about race,” they are pretty much always saying when black person, latino person, muslim person not acting the way white european would act wants them act.', 'and black women having fun get kicked off wine tour for “acting disruptive” when they were doing the same thing white women every day. but it’s not about race. it’s not, then it’s about them not obeying the cultural expectations white people which amounts the same damn thing.', '“if you see something, say something” works really well when everyone looks and acts the same way. when they don’t, you have italian mathematician getting kicked off plane because white woman scared he’s islamic terrorist.', 'all this simply because people color have different cultural foundation. because they are not allowed act within their culture.', 'if white person can still “dine,” can still carry the european culture thousand years ago, then surely black person can carry some west african culture few hundred years ago. surely muslim can carry the culture her parents.', 'this why sat discussion group race and was angry that white man was telling should “rise above emotions” and “get the heart the matter” talking about race intellectually and avoiding emotions.', 'why need center discussion about racism the white cultural experience? why need communicate using western cultural norms? so, can talk about race, but shouldn’t talk about race the way black person carrying west african culture would talk about it? should avoid their anger and pain? would “better” talk about way that western europeans will comfortable talking about it?', 'in other words: “let’s make sure everyone speaking our language and knows who’s charge.”', 'and i’m sure didn’t even know was doing it, because can’t see that white culture normative. every single thing white people and say done the context normative white culture, which they don’t have think about.', 'because everything person color does done while knowing they are not part normative white culture. have think about everything and every word say. saying this too loudly? look like might stealing? complain about these working conditions, will they call lazy? why did this teacher tell can’t engineer when i’ve got 3.8 gpa? why being pulled over when did nothing wrong?', 'we think about this all the time much that it’s mostly unconscious the time we’re teenagers. but don’t talk about because when conflict comes with white person that “not about race,” would take too damn long explain all this them. and we’d have explain over and over every white person meet hoping they will “get it.”', 'and most the time, they won’t get it. most the time, they can’t see their own culture, much less someone else’s, meaning they have idea what the hell we’re talking about anyway. either get angry, just close our eyes, nod our heads, and say things like “yeah, using the socratic method talk intellectually would probably good way for discuss systematic racism.”', '“yeah, let’s your way.”']
'in recent days, multiple well-respected journalistic outlets have announced much fanfare that, having reflected the rapidly shifting american racial landscape, they will capitalizing “black” designations for people and cultures. some have also clarified why they’re not capitalizing “white.”', '“black ethnic designation; white merely describes the skin color people who can, usually without much difficulty, trace their ethnic origins back handful european countries,” wrote mike laws the columbia journalism review june 16, before the article was updated with revised language. dean baquet and phil corbett the new york times wrote that “there less sense that ‘white’ describes shared culture and history.”', 'unfortunately, this choice runs the risk reinforcing the dangerous myth that white people america not have racial identity.', haven’t always capitalized “white” own writing, but now. here’s why.', 'whiteness not only absence. it’s not hole the map america’s racial landscape. rather, specific social category that confers identifiable and measurable social benefits. were collectively reminded that this past week, when mark and patricia mccloskey st. louis stood outside their home pointing loaded firearms directly peaceful protestors making their way down the street. that moment, the mccloskeys held the lives strangers their hands. they could have murdered any those black people that day, and history both distant and recent suggests that they may have been able with total impunity.', 'when ignore the specificity and significance whiteness the things that is, the things that does contribute its seeming neutrality and thereby grant power maintain its invisibility.', 'meanwhile, black people, from tamir rice darrien hunt john crawford, and countless others whose names may never know, have been murdered for holding, respectively, toy gun, fake sword used for cosplay, and gun. tamir rice will never drive car college. darrien hunt will never attend another nerdy convention watch anime again. john crawford will never again hug his baby boys, jayden and john henry iv. the mccloskeys, who are personal injury trial lawyers, live on.', 'the stunning incongruousness these facts that 12-year-old with pellet gun would murdered sight the same country where mark mccloskey could stand openly the street brandishing semi-automatic rifle and his wife could point pistol directly passersby, rage contorting her face rests not only the blackness rice, hunt, and crawford. rests also the whiteness the mccloskeys: the veneer presumed innocence, respectability, and righteousness that protected them like shield that day. this shield ensconced their bodies, and their renaissance-style palazzo, all which remain intact and unsullied the time this writing. this shield protected dylann roof his way burger king. protected the still-unnamed woman who seen recent viral video screaming people and throwing food trader joe’s, who was unharmed though police were called response her behavior. protects white children public who are screaming running touching things they shouldn’t touch, while black parents grasp their children tightly fear that similar behavior could cost them their lives someday. it’s phenomenon all its own, something bigger than being not-black not-indigenous not-asian.', 'perhaps the only thing more remarkable than the powers this shield its seeming invisibility, which permits white people move through the world without ever considering the fact their whiteness. this incredible feat, through which white people get only normal, neutral, without any race all, while the rest are saddled with this unpleasant business being racialized.', 'i’m reminded the highly autonomous robots the hbo series westworld, which are programmed when they are faced with incontrovertible evidence that they are robots reply simply, “doesn’t look like anything me!” this great phrase use next time organization proudly tweets photo its all-white class congressional interns, television writers’ room, nonprofit board directors. these people and organizations share such photos cloudy bliss, the shield surrounding them, protecting them from self-doubt displeasure. when the rest raise the alarm, they squint the photo, confused. “doesn’t look like anything me!” and with that quick, easy magic, whiteness remains invisible, and the case with all power structures, its invisibility does crucial work maintain its power. maintaining the pretense its invisibility, whiteness maintains the pretense its inevitability, and its innocence. long white people not ever have interrogate what whiteness is, where comes from, how operates, what does, they can maintain the fiction that race other people’s problem, that they are mere observers centuries-long stage play which they have, fact, been the producers, directors, and central actors.', 'language and racial categories have some important things common: they are fluid, they are inherently political, and they are socially constructed set shared norms that are constantly flux our beliefs and circumstances change.', 'other than the demonstrably untrue idea that white “merely” describes skin color, there are other interesting arguments consider for keeping lowercase. for instance, many black people know say that they capitalize black show respect, pride, and celebration, and they don’t want afford the same courtesy whiteness. but frequently capitalize words for reasons other than respect words like holocaust, hell, which can capitalized indicate specificity significance. when ignore the specificity and significance whiteness the things that is, the things that does contribute its seeming neutrality and thereby grant power maintain its invisibility.', 'some outlets have also noted that white supremacist hate groups capitalize white, shouldn’t. that, respond with ancient african american proverb: ain’t studdin’ them.', 'ultimately, it’s good that we’re having this public conversation. plenty other scholars who study race and racism will disagree with this, and that’s fine. fact, disagree with myself from two years ago. own 2018 book, ghosts the schoolyard, which about schools and racism hometown chicago, capitalized black, but not white fact that astute undergraduate student mine noticed last year and asked about, noting that class slides now include capital told her that after thinking about some more, changed mind. might change mind again. language and racial categories have some important things common: they are fluid, they are inherently political, and they are socially constructed set shared norms that are constantly flux our beliefs and circumstances change.', 'the terms use, and the ways write them, are less about saying doing the “correct” thing, the thing that will prevent you from getting flamed twitter earning eye roll staff meeting. rather, it’s about what want words for and the arguments we’re trying make about ourselves and the world through the words choose.', 'so, what trying when capitalize white? one favorite sci-fi tropes the archetypal scene which character tests whether invisible force field present throwing something and then standing back cautiously observe the almost-imperceptible buzz the moment impact. where there appears nothing all, there is, fact, danger. that’s what hope do, small way, when capitalize white. i’m throwing stick the force field around the mccloskeys. i’m trying say, small way, think there’s something there.”']
'as mixed-race woman who has internalized racism and white privilege, undertook the journey integrating identity that felt “other” but the same time spoke truth experiences had always known but failed recognize. have felt shame and guilt for having bought into family’s lie, for passing, and for distancing myself from the few african americans community.', 'in middle school, two black classmates approached and asked wanted join their group. they didn’t say “group black students,” but knew what they meant. said no. their recognition our shared identity made uncomfortable because had been taught see blackness “less than.” the white couldn’t risk being associated with them. that feeling led reject the offer friendship from kids who, like me, were trying find group where they belonged.', 'my identity journey has been complicated mother’s claim that biological father was unknown man who raped her. for long time, her story made difficult for feel pride black roots. the possibility that mother had lied about this muddled feelings even more.', '“we wouldn’t having this conversation had been white,” mother said during one our many arguments about desire know biological father. she was right. the man who had impregnated her had been white, may never have known that had different father than brothers. had been white, she may not have even known that wasn’t father’s child. had been white, there would have been secret keep.', 'to say that biological father was black man who raped mother sounds like the most terrible racist cliché. was the warning slave owners intoned about keeping sexually rapacious black men away from their pure white women. was still learning about black history when discovered identity, but knew about emmett till, who, fourteen, had been beaten death for allegedly whistling white woman. knew there was mythology built around black rapists targeting white women, but felt compelled believe mother.', 'for years was torn between blackness and gender. was supposed feel more sympathy for the black man the white woman the story? telling her story, mother had drawn line, and would have decide where stood.', 'if believed her, would have disavow blackness; decided explore black heritage, would betray her. had landed ethical checkmate: rejected her truth, was denying her rape. accepted her lie, was standing with the slave owners who demonized black men. with clear answer, adopted mother’s shame for blackness, which revealed her dirty secret, whatever was.', '“you came from me. you’re white because i’m white,” she said during another our arguments. couldn’t understand why she subsumed identity beneath her own. the answers are racism and white privilege, but gender plays into the formula well. was not just being white person that was stake, was being white woman. without realizing it, mother had revealed that her gender values were rooted race.', realized that growing up, she wasn’t just teaching how woman, she was teaching how white woman. attractive, educated, accomplished, worthy these were qualities that mother assumed were only achievable continued white.', 'publishing memoir made family’s secrets public, cementing the wall between mother and me.', 'since publishing the memoir, readers have asked feel forced choose between black and white. first instinct say “no”. acknowledge myself mixed-race person who grew white family and identifies black and biracial. have relationship with white family and appreciate european heritage, even though space which will always othered.', 'as woman, identify black and mixed-race. friends and share the experience being black women the world, even come from different backgrounds. identify mixed-race because, addition having one black and one white parent, being light-skinned and having mixed features gives advantage the matrix colorist, europeanized beauty standards that have historically (and artificially) privileged mixed and light-skinned women.', reviewer memoir wondered why could not “be white” the same way that could black mixed. this might seem self-evident; white identity nature exclusionary, and being mixed invalidates claim whiteness. how people mixed heritage identify perennial issue, and everyone must answer that question for themselves. for me, accepting whiteness meant rejecting parts myself that had been erased for too long. although lived white until was 27, not white-passing. black roots are obvious. even when thought was passing, the real possibility people believing was white was absurd.', 'despite being person color, whiteness remains blind spot. even though have worked for years rid myself internalized racism, have not been able decouple white identity from its inherent privilege. like others grappling with the legacy white supremacy, yearn see myself part the solution, not the problem.', 'storytelling gave framework approach these issues all their messy complexity without resorting facile identity politics. letting new-formed self develop the page, not linearly, but with ragged-edged grief and the constant doubling back memory, the fragments that emerged formed whole.', 'to others grappling with the same questions, realize that some (or lot) the racism you internalized will always with you. much you want to, cannot erased. instead seeking become more righteous and less culpable, own your error and let the page guide you reflect how whiteness has privileged you, even source pain.', 'for mixed-race individuals, forgive yourself for being racially illegible and for choosing identity that minimized that discomfort.', 'for white individuals, acknowledge that live society that positions whiteness “self” and people color “other.” your goal ally make more space for the “other,” your allyship has already failed.', 'instead, position whiteness and yourself “other” and talk about that experience. you are brutally honest, you will acknowledge that your life white person rooted your failure recognize the humanity the “other” and your desire separate yourself from them. you leave this part out your activism, you revert the same comfortable distance that white privilege granted you the first place.', 'right now, everyone wants amplify black voices. white people are stepping aside that black, indigenous, and people color can access the many platforms that have silenced them for generations. the message, loud and clear, that black lives matter. our stories, ideas, and experiences matter. even person color, own journey through the shame benefiting from white privilege and struggle actively antiracist are not complete and they never will be. the only way ensure the message this moment does not fade acknowledge that dismantling racism lifetime’s work.', 'photo credit: pexels', 'sarah valentine, ph.d., author the critically acclaimed memoir when was white. she holds ph.d. russian literature from princeton and teaches english sierra nevada university. find her sarahvalentine.co']
'aka the definitive guide the blackness shaun king', '(originally written august 20th, 2015 after public attack from milo breitbart caused story the top trending topic the world, this story has been updated for medium with new sources, quotes, photos, and details.)', —', 'over the past hours (in august 2015) have been attacked with lies the conservative media, lies that have been picked the traditional media and spread further. name and story were the top trending topic the world. have kept silent the advice friends and mentors, who thought could just ride out the hate until went away, but will longer. wasn’t working. this new time.', 'the reports about race, about past, and about the pain i’ve endured are all lies. mother senior citizen. refuse speak detail about the nature mother’s past, her sexual partners, and gravely embarrassed even saying this now, but have been told for most life that the white man birth certificate not biological father and that actual biological father light-skinned black man. mother and have discussed her affair. she was young woman bad relationship and have judgment. this has been lived reality for nearly years earth. not ashamed it, who never that but was advised pastor nearly years ago that this was not mess doing and was not responsibility fix it. all siblings and have different parents. i’m actually not even sure how many siblings have. horrifying that most personal information, for the most nefarious reasons, has been forced out into the open and that private past and pain have been used jokes and fodder discredit and the greater movement for justice america. resent that lies have been reported truth and that the obviously racist intentions these attacks have been consistently downplayed expense and that family.', 'for entire life, have held the cards complicated family history very close chest. preferred keep that way and deeply resent that have been forced authenticate many intimate details life prove who really am. this, and itself, form violence. the same sources who falsely reported family history including breitbart, the daily caller, and the blaze have also falsely reported that wife and were never brutal car accident, that lied about how many kids have (we have now, but have had more/less because we’ve fostered, adopted, housed many our nieces and nephews), that lied about race get scholarship from oprah, that lied about how many back surgeries i’ve had, and more. all those things were completely and totally false, but have simply been ignored expense. don’t know why this shocks me, but does.', 'let share some peculiar american story about race, unwavering love for mother, and gratitude for entire community people who’ve walked with through this for entire life. just because you are just now learning story doesn’t make secret. every single person who has known throughout life has known most what i’m sharing here today.', 'when was years old and the second grade, black children first began asking was “mixed.” our house, white mother, the sweetest woman ever and one the best friends i’ve ever had, didn’t talk much about race. most white families don’t. it’s part the privilege. didn’t even know what “mixed” was. this isn’t secret. i’ve told this story publicly front thousands people.', 'after that day when was first asked was mixed, while was still very young child, kids and their well-intentioned parents began telling they knew who black father was, that was and so’s cousin, etc. this was small-town versailles, kentucky, the 1980s. happened regularly for years end. while didn’t have understanding the national dialogue interracial children, knew even young child that what people were telling meant something very peculiar and unflattering about mother. was aware how different looked than siblings, but didn’t understand dna genealogy. they were family and loved them.', adored mother much then, that just didn’t have the nerve ever bring these things her. was child and loved our care-free relationship. she had been married and divorced several times and the time was second grade she was raising brother and single mom. the time reached middle school, fully identified myself not even biracial, but just black. white classmate mine from middle school just posted her recollection this. course, that was oversimplification story, but that was what made sense that time. adults who loved and knew me, many occasions sat down and told that was black. you could imagine, this had profound impact and soon became truth.', 'every friend had was black, girlfriends were black, was seen black, treated black, and endured constant overt racism young black teenager. never have once identified myself white. not forms, not for convenience privilege, and not for fun and games, have ever identified myself white. was never white guy pretending black. not once, ever, did occur that was being phony fraudulent fake. quite the opposite always believed was living the truest form self.', 'my freshman year high school, another student and got into huge fight football game. the fight ended setting off powder keg racial tensions our school. the school paper back then referred black and him white. were suspended for three days and while were out, racial tensions boiled over much that hundreds white students staged walkout because they had just been banned from wearing confederate flags.', 'when returned school from that suspension, the collective anger the racist white students was focused daily. dozens close friends experienced this racist hate alongside and broke down the worst ways. was consistently called nigger, spat on, had jar tobacco spit thrown face, forced into fights, and two different occasions chased pickup trucks attempting maul us. 2007, one the students one those trucks wrote beautiful, moving apology for calling nigger and more that scary dark night. with his permission, will republish soon.', 'in march 1995, all boiled over and racist mob nearly dozen students beat severely, first punching from all sides, then, when cradled into fetal position the ground they stomped mercilessly, some with steel-toed boots, for about seconds. that day changed the entire trajectory life. thankfully, multiple credible, unbiased eyewitnesses this traumatic day have come out publicly and spoken behalf the past hours. here is, pasted below well.', 'the band teacher from woodfoord county high school, nathanael carter, who living legend versailles, and was the one the only black teachers the school, saw shea’s account what happened me, and posted the following comment response.', few days after was assaulted, was home recovering when group rednecks literally pulled driveway night, but were chased off neighbor with big flashlight. had idea ever did that. just remembered them pulling our driveway and yard and peeling out. that neighbor just posted his memory it.', had fractures face and ribs, but most badly damaged was spine. ended having three spinal surgeries and missed months school over it. entire family endured this deeply painful time life ranging from the surgeries, the brutal recovery, physical therapy, and professional counseling. that people are now claiming never happened wild me. was rougher than words will ever justice. best friend, willis polk, who has known since kindergartern, and popularly known the rapper deacon the villain from cunninglynguists, was like brother through these surgeries and all the time missed. here’s his account:', 'many people have said that the police report listed white checked the box and that was some deep admission. today, that officer, keith broughton, actually stated that only checked the white box because biracial wasn’t option and that knew wasn’t white. you have remember, this wasn’t 2017 this was 1995 rural kentucky. here’s the quote from the officer who completed the report that breitbart claims proves white.', '“i believe that he’s biracial. could just tell when saw him. marked him white because he’s very light complected. was there with his white mother. crime report there’s only two things you can check: black white. doesn’t say biracial…anyone from around here who knew him knew was mixed.”', 'here copy that police report. mind you, didn’t fill this out review it. was the hospital. everybody versailles knew wasn’t white. knew it. wasn’t secret.', 'for the first time years recently spoke with officer keith broughton (who white). was powerfully emotional moment for me. here’s some what said that conversation.', '“man, when filled out that report, and checked that white box, never thought about again. knew you weren’t white, but knew that you weren’t fully black either. saw your white mother there with you, checked white, and moved on. have more boxes choose from now. course, none had any idea that years later people would using report try prove something that just isn’t the case. repeatedly told this breitbart when they reached out me, but they left everything said them out their reports about the story. for instance, told them specificially that most your injuries your spine weren’t visible because the nature the injuries, but they reported that said you weren’t injured. that’s just not what said.”', 'we sued the school system for years because their severe mishandling assault. they fought tooth and nail and mother and eventually just gave it.', 'rev. willis polk, local pastor, and best friend’s father, visited and prayed with often during those surgeries. became christian during recovery. was baptized and preached first sermons high school teenage minister the black church. rev. polk, his son willis, and toured hbcu’s together 1996 and knew that morehouse college atlanta was the only place for us. loved it.', 'again, this wasn’t sneaking into morehouse undercover white man. was and racial identity was fully formed. knew who was. wasn’t appropriating faking, but living out life. during this entire time, mother and had unspoken understanding about race. her past, sense, was taboo for me, and had honestly moved from even wanting know the details who she slept with january 1979. sincerely didn’t care and had compartmentalized deep mind and moved the best could.', 'to clear, received full academic and leadership scholarship attend morehouse college based grades and leadership skills. love morehouse. helped heal from the brokenness past and very best friendships and bonds were formed there. hundreds students who knew well morehouse have shared their experiences. wasn’t obscure student was the student government president and probably the most visible leader the campus.', 'when was forced leave morehouse have yet another spinal surgery, lost that scholarship and was then offered scholarship from oprah winfrey when returned complete studies. she wanted for “diamonds the rough” and that was pretty much who was that point. didn’t apply for it. nobody does. the college selects brothers who need and was, very gratefully, chosen for it.', 'since finishing morehouse nearly years ago, have consistently and publicly shared complicated story interracial child, facing the pressures racism environment that lacked little intelligence compassion about it. part this story has always been that never chose black/interracial. not only was chosen for birth, but white students and staff fundamentally rejected me. furthermore, the black community, peers, their parents, and local black leaders, seeing that was, essence, kid without community, embraced the deepest, most soul-soothing ways.', 'my wife, who has been with since were both high school, has walked with through this every step the way and shared her story here earlier today. pasted below, well.', 'outside mother’s home, kid lived deeply black experience. black families invited attend vacation bible school. attended black family reunions where old people would come and pinch cheeks and tell who looked like their family. went black skate parties, black block parties/festivals, and did not white intruder, but karl kani wearing, widely welcomed, light-skinned black kid. soaked every moment had was fully, unabashedly loved, even doted upon, black families throughout central kentucky. was refuge for and also rite passage sorts. high school joined exclusively black achievers groups. with scholars love and respect this day the university kentucky, attended and helped plan king day events, and just lived life.', 'until this past week, never has anyone asked who father was during these years mine. occurs now that i’ve never asked anyone who their father either. it’s odd question, and, case, has complicated, deeply personal answer, but one that have actually seen lived out many other times. have walked other people very close wife and through what like find out that the person you believed was your father actually isn’t. this actually pretty common thing.', now see pictures all our young children, distant relatives, and even people who not actually related spread across the internet attempt shame somehow. this disgusting. want clear. love family. have never, not once, hidden been ashamed family. and not single member family has ever spoken out against me. anyone saying they have lying. they are biggest supporters and defenders and always have been. most the pictures people have shared prove that white actually came from own social media accounts that have shared hundreds thousands people. i’ve never hidden white family members pictures from childhood. they weren’t discovered secretly tucked away vault somewhere— posted them. love family. all them. again, though, none are full blood brothers and sisters. course all look different. posting pictures that i’ve shared with the world proof that white just plain dumb.', 'not one person behind these reports has remotely good intentions quite the opposite, fact. since these articles have been released, family and have received constant death threats and nonstop racist harassment. multiple members family have been harassed and now have been forced take extra security measures for our safety.', 'this was the goal… divide and conquer. but will not allow define distract for one more day and hope that all you reading this will move with me. have promised wife, kids, extended family, and friends that this will the last time talk about this publicly for long time. work has never been about and i’ve never made big deal about race. i’ve actually tried hard avoid ever making big deal out and have, instead, simply tried good work that matters. i’m eager get back the cause that concerns most.', 'my focus will continue ending police brutality. believe the pre-eminent civil rights issue modern america and that, together, can fight against effectively.']
rld where everybody’s lives are are perpetual display accolades, achievements, and accomplishments, it’s easy continually compare yourself other people. few years ago, chris brogan said “nobody ever won race looking sideways.” after that, stopped reading people’s income reports, blog posts about tactics and started work. started run own race and became much more prolific creator.', 'i’ve heard joke that silicon valley you have million dollars you’re poor because you’re neighbor probably has 120 million. you can always find someone who has more:', 'comparing yourself people who have more not going turn you into one them. but you compare less and create more, you might actually become person who has more.', 'no matter how much you accumulate, you can’t take any with you when you die. friend leon says about, the game monopoly:', 'the day graduated from school, the world handed pair dice and pointed towards familiar board game. except this time instead rolls royce, was sporting busted ass metrocard. the parameters this game were simple. just follow the board, round and round, and the longer stayed the board, the more times could pass go, the more stupid little green houses i’d get buy, the more railroads i’d procure the more wealth i’d accumulate. all which would culminate into turning into happy rich guy with white mustache and top hat.', 'of course, soon enough realized that was essentially spending the vast majority existence rolling the same stupid dice over and over again, following the same board completely prescribed life plan, taking risks, tucking away every dream ever had, living for the weekend, and peering off the board from time time, dreaming the glory life that could have been', 'we seem forget one the most important lessons the game monopoly: once the game over all goes back the box.', 'if you don’t appreciate what you have now, you’ll never appreciate what you get later tim ferriss', 'compared people who walk miles day get clean drinking water, everybody reading this has plenty grateful for. one the saddest things saw few days ago netflix was episode the documentary the beginning life. young indian girl living poverty asked what her biggest dreams were. she said, don’t have any dreams.” even you have dreams that haven’t necessarily come true, you have more than you might aware of.', 'one favorite sections seth godin’s seminar leap first when talks about money stories. all have money story. and says one way unwind our stories about money become philanthropist. tells the story his friend sasha dichter who for months time gives money people the streets and makes donations anyone who asks. concludes the story saying “you can’t possibly person who tips dollars and dollar cup coffee and still have limiting narrative around money.”', 'in his book wealth attraction, dan kennedy encourages people set percentage every dollar they receive for saving and for giving:', 'giving has incredible effect your psyche. immediately open another bank account and call your giving account. also, predetermine fixed percentage every dollar that you receive divert your giving account.', 'you don’t have bill gates billionaire become philanthropist. someone who wants see changes happen our education, i’ve loved being able support teacher projects donorschoose.', 'we all have unique destiny this world. and running your own race great way ensure the realization that destiny and live much richer and rewarding life. and best friend from college always reminded every time felt like all friends were far ahead life “what are you going srini, race the the death?”', 'if doing the best work your life important you, you’ll love free guide: “optimizing productivity creativity.”', 'the tactics i’ve packed into this guide allowed write over million words the last years. what could for your life’s work? don’t miss it.', 'like the article? click the below share with others medium.']